[PAGE 1] Introduction

Introduction to provocative questions
in left-right asymmetry

Left-right asymmetry is a phenomenon that has a broad appeal to anat-
omists, developmental biologists and evolutionary biologists—because it is a
morphological feature of organisms that spans scales of size and levels of
organization, from unicellular protists, to vertebrate organs, to social behav-
iour. Here, we highlight a number of important aspects of asymmetry that
encompass several areas of biology-cell-level, physiological, genetic, anatom-
ical and evolutionary components—and that are based on research conducted
in diverse model systems, ranging from single cells to invertebrates to human
developmental disorders. Together, the contributions in this issue reveal a
heretofore-unsuspected variety in asymmetry mechanisms, including ancient
chirality elements that could underlie a much more universal basis to asymme-
try development, and provide much fodder for thought with far reaching
implications in biomedical, developmental, evolutionary and synthetic biology.
The new emerging theme of binary cell-fate choice, promoted by asymmetric
cell division of a deterministic cell, has focused on investigating asymmetry
mechanisms functioning at the single cell level. These include cytoskeleton
and DNA chain asymmetry—mechanisms that are amplified and coordinated
with those employed for the determination of the anterior-posterior and
dorsal-ventral axes of the embryo.

This article is part of the themed issue ‘Provocative questions in left-
right asymmetry'.

[PAGE 1] Introduction

From the nano to the macro, the man-made to the natural and the simple to the
complex, the world we inhabit is rich in pattern. Although there is extensive
variance in the intricacy and magnitude of the patterns that surround us,
they fundamentally stem from only two core motifs: symmetry and asymmetry.
Prevalent in our art, architecture, dance, music, fashion and other design-sym-
metry evokes order, desire, harmony and perfection. Indeed, we place such
high value on symmetry that its presence in facial features can be used to
define physical beauty. Like symmetry, asymmetry is also pervasive in our
aesthetics, where it lends a provocative contrast, representing the dynamic,
the unexpected, the emerging and the innovative. Together, symmetry and
asymmetry comprise the proverbial Yin and Yang, the black and white, the
metaphorical good and sinister. Both are essential for completeness, but too
much in either direction disrupts a critical balance-symmetry unchecked
by asymmetry transmutes order, harmony and beauty into static, sterile
and monotonous. Asymmetry unchecked by symmetry becomes aberrant,
unrestrained and chaotic.

Biology holds no exception to this duet. At first glance, symmetry may
appear to be the predominant pattern in nature; indeed, animal cognitive systems
have evolved sensitive symmetry detectors that function during mating choice
and predator detection. However, organisms ranging from protists to plants to

[PAGE 2] 

vertebrates possess a fascinating collection of asymmetries
within their body structures. Such morphological asymmetries
exist with respect to the left-right (L/R) axis, spanning scales
of size and levels of anatomical organization. The ability of
biological forms to reliably generate consistent asymmetry in
a universe that does not distinguish left from right (except at
the quantum level) [1,2] is a remarkable phenomenon that
attracts significant interest from many disciplines. As the first
laterality genes were discovered only about 20 years ago, the
field of L/R asymmetry is in a vibrant state of advancement,
with emerging insights into deep unresolved questions about
the cell biology and evolutionary history of chirality, propelled
by identification of a steady stream of molecular-level work
performed in a range of model systems.


In higher organisms, the establishment of body shape
requires precise development and coordination of anterior-
posterior (A/P), dorsal-ventral (D/V) and L/R body axes
during embryogenesis. D/V and A/P axes are specified by
external forces that operate on the oocyte, such as the point
of sperm entry, maternal animal-vegetal gradients and the
effect of gravity. Of the three body axes, the most open ques-
tions concern the mechanisms of specifying and patterning the
L/R axis. Models proposed to explain laterality mechanisms
remain controversial, but it is clear that anomalies of L/R
axis determination can lead to a spectrum of congenital
disorders that affect both arrangement and morphology of
the heart and visceral organs. L/R visceral organ asymmetry
anomalies are broadly classified as two disorders, situs ambi-
guus and situs inversus. Also termed heterotaxy, situs
ambiguus is a disorder of discordance in which some organs
develop normal L/R asymmetry and others do not. This
class of laterality disorders includes isomerism, in which
some normally asymmetric organs instead develop symmetri-
cally (e.g. left or right atrial or pulmonary isomerism) with
health consequences, including prenatal death. Situs ambiguus
is associated with significant foetal and perinatal lethality in
humans and other vertebrates, largely owing to the develop-
ment of complex congenital heart defects. Comparatively less
mortality is associated with situs inversus, a disorder in
which all organs are concordantly (mirror-image) reversed
with respect to the other two body axes. Nevertheless, as cili-
ary defects are often associated with situs inversus, respiratory,
kidney and reproductive function are frequently compromised
in affected individuals. Moreover, developmental anomalies of
unknown cause with ectodermal derived tissues representing
brain hemispheric L/R asymmetry are associated with debili-
tating schizophrenia and bipolar psychoses disorders found in
approximately 2.0% individuals worldwide and for that of the
very rare mirror-hand movements disorder found in humans.

Because of the importance of L/R axis determination for
vertebrates' health and the many questions surrounding
the mechanisms involved, it was an obvious choice for the
Royal Society to publish a monograph on this subject. The
editors' intention in accepting this assignment was to high-
light recent research achievements, current controversies
and remaining gaps in our knowledge in the field, with the
goal to help guide future research. Experts in this field
were asked in their contributions to summarize the progress
made thus far, either as review articles or original research
articles. We believe this monograph will be useful for
researchers in this specific field, as a tool for teaching devel-
opmental biology in graduate-level courses and for teaching
the biology of origin of congenital disorders to medical

[PAGE 2] Synopsis of laterality chapters

As defining the mechanisms driving L/R asymmetric pheno-
types is the main subject of this theme issue, it begins with a
compact yet comprehensive review by Palmer [3], who discusses
the ways in which asymmetries arise in otherwise bilaterally
symmetrical organisms. This review beautifully highlights very
different phenotypes of laterality development in diverse organ-
isms, tackling the questions of how symmetry is first broken
during embryogenesis, whether it is determined by genes,
environment and chance, whether direction of asymmetry is
maintained during regeneration of a tissue and whether asymme-
try is produced at the organ level or globally at the organismal
level. By reviewing asymmetry across multiple species and
their morphogenetic features, such as gastropod coiling, flatfish
eye sidedness, directional crossbill crossing, claw asymmetry in
lobsters, crabs and shrimp, katydid sound-producing structures
and various plant asymmetries the message is reinforced of
the diversity that exists across organisms in the process of asym-
metry, with different mechanisms likely having evolved multiple
times for the benefit of each species. One particularly illuminating
example of this is presented by the genetics of coiling direction
controlled by two of the three alleles of a single locus of gastro-
pods. They are the right, left and stochastic alleles, where the
stochastic allele is recessive to both the dominant right or left alleles
of a specific species. One key question this raises for future
research is whether there is a commonality of biological
mechanisms used for evolution of novel phenotypic variation
of L/R asymmetry? The study of Schilthuizen et al. [4] adds to
the understanding of evolution of asymmetry in the context of
another coiling macroscopic feature: the asymmetric genitalia in
Coleoptera. Asymmetry in male genitalia is a pervasive aspect
of much of the animal kingdom, raising interesting questions
about the physical and behavioural dynamics that drive this
outcome in animals with highly diverse body plans and lifestyles.
Regarding the molecular origin of asymmetry, one popu-
lar model suggests that ciliary movement during neurulation
initiates asymmetry in those organisms that have cilia prior to
the appearance of laterality. For some vertebrates, ciliary


[PAGE 3] 

movement during neurulation and the subsequent calcium
signal is a crucial event [5]. An excellent review of this
model with details on the role of motile cilia in leftward
fluid flow in humans and animal models is provided by
Dasgupta and Amack [6]. They explain that while there is con-
sensus that a transient leftward fluid flow can direct left-side
asymmetric activation of the conserved Nodal pathway,
namely in mouse and zebrafish, there is evidence indicating
that not all vertebrates use this mechanism. Moreover, as
also discussed by Dasgupta and Amack [6], and elsewhere
[7], this model has faced a number of problems, including
the question of what mechanism(s) are used to sense the
fluid flow-e.g. mechanosensitive cilia, morphogen gradients
or vesicular particles. More recent studies have shown that pri-
mary cilia are not in fact calcium-responsive mechanosensors
[8], and that asymmetries in cleavage-stage frog embryos
have not only consistently asymmetric metabolic profiles [9],
but also protein components with functional roles in asymme-
try development [10]. Consistent with the existence of L/R
asymmetry at such an early stage of development, Dasgupta
and Amack [6] used mosaic cell labelling and time-lapse ima-
ging in the zebrafish embryo to demonstrate that ciliated cells
within Kupffer's vesicle-a structure that is functionally analo-
gous to the embryonic node and alternatively termed the 'L/R
organizer' are non-stochastically arranged, suggesting that
they may be propagating L/R positional information that
exists prior to L/R Organizer morphogenesis and hence,
generation of directional fluid flow.

If asymmetry precedes the L/R organizer, then what is the
symmetry-breaking event and when does it occur? A common
view of development suggests that cells in the embryo initially
are undifferentiated, and that a morphogen gradient is gener-
ated to specify gene regulatory networks on cells located at
different locations in the embryo [11]. This model was adapted
by Wolpert [12] for explaining general development, including
L/R axis determination [13], and has constituted the major
paradigm for guiding developmental biology research con-
ducted for decades. The variety of data described in this
issue reveals that asymmetry mechanisms are far broader. In
fact, in a 2009 interview, Wolpert discarded the morphogen
model by stating: 'diffusible gradients are out' [14, p. 659]. In
our view, the mechanisms of L/R axis remain open, with
two emerging (and non-mutually exclusive) alternatives to
the morphogen model: both place the element of initial L/R
asymmetry inside the cell, as opposed to extracellular fluid
flow, and notably at a much earlier time point (early cleavage).
As expertly presented by Klar [15], one intriguing model that
is fundamentally different from the commonly invoked mor-
phogen model is based on DNA strand-specific segregation,
driven by the mechanism of somatic strand-specific imprinting
and selective chromatid segregation (SSIS). This mechanism
invokes the processes of monochromatid gene expression, and
that is based on the asymmetry of DNA chains of developmental
control gene(s), followed by selective segregation of thus epigen-
etically differentiated sister chromatids in the mitosis of a
deterministic cell to produce developmentally unequal sister
cells. This paper summarizes previous application of this
mechanism to explain the genetically caused variation of devel-
opment of visceral organs' laterality in vertebrates, the piebald
(i.e. two different colours; black spots on one wing and red
spots on the lateral wing) mutant phenotype of the Bruchus
beetle and anomalies of brain hemispheric asymmetry owing
to chromosome 11 rearrangements that are associated with

[PAGE 3] 

psychoses and for mirror-hand movement disorders owing to
RAD51 haploinsufficiency in humans. Klar [15] has here
extended the application of this developmental mechanism to
explain the genetics of congenital limb developmental anomaly
in humans. This anomaly is called the split hand/foot malfor-
mation, where the index and middle fingers fail to develop
with variable penetrance even for different limbs of the same
person. It is known that deletions and conventional mutations
of DLX5 (the Drosophila distal-less dll homologue) in chromosome
7 cause the anomaly with incomplete penetrance owing to hap-
loinsufficiency, but paradoxically, the vast majority of cases
result from chromosomal aberrations where the DLX5 locus
itself is not mutated, and moreover, where the aberration break-
points are often located millions of bases away from the DLX5
locus. Klar [15] concludes that chromosome 7 translocations
and inversions associated with the disorder (whose genetic
aetiology has remained unexplained thus far) have satisfied
developmental biology predictions of the SSIS mechanism. It
is argued that the double-helix structure of DNA itself forms
the physical basis of turning the developmental control gene
ON in one chromatid and OFF in sister chromatid during repli-
cation of the progenitor cell's gene, and this binary-coded gene
expression switching mechanism may be the underlying mech-
anism of development in general. By evolving factors that can
vary the selective strand/chromatid segregation process func-
tioning at the centromere of the relevant chromosome, both
regulated asymmetric versus symmetric cell divisions can be
produced in different cell types by the same intracellular SSIS
mechanism, providing a possible molecular explanation for
the Ying and Yang developmental outcome described above.
Another alternative model of symmetry breaking is
grounded in the role of the cytoskeleton, with a mechanism
that has strong implications for evolution. It should be
appreciated that intracellular features of cellular polarity
and cytoskeleton comprising cellular chirality (to be pre-
sented below) must play a critical role for the SSIS
mechanism to operate. Nodal ciliary flow is absent in pig
and chick, as well as Drosophila, snails and Caenorhabditis
elegans; thus, if cilia are crucial in some situations, then the
origin of asymmetry must be highly divergent across phyla.
By contrast, intracellular cytoskeletal elements are highly con-
served; recent data revealed a microtubule protein that was
functionally implicated in asymmetry of plants, C. elegans,
Xenopus and human cells [10]. One possibility is that asym-
metry is an ancient property that predates the origins of
multicellularity; even bacteria [16], unicellular ciliates [17]
and slime moulds [18] exhibit asymmetry. Satir's paper [19]
deftly overviews the many actin filaments and microtubule
processes in cells that exhibit chiral properties, and illustrates
how helical properties of cytoskeletal elements instruct cell
behaviour and subsequent morphogenesis.

Consistent with this model, exciting recent data have
revealed that individual cells have many directionally
oriented asymmetric behaviours that can be explained by
chiral properties that have an impact on large-scale structures
to which these cells contribute [20-23]. The ability of single
cells (even in vitro) to determine their L/R axis in the absence
of ciliated organs [24-26] suggests that in at least some cases,
asymmetry is leveraged intracellularly and may be present
throughout the body. The link between single-cell asymmetry
and whole-body asymmetry is one of the most exciting future
aspects of this field. Inaki et al. [27] have reviewed studies
with model systems addressing the role of cellular chirality


[PAGE 4] 

in L/R axis determination and asymmetric organ development.
They review various cultured cell lines of vertebrates that show
intrinsic chirality affecting cellular behaviours, and suggest that
chirality derives from cellular structures such as basal bodies
and/or cytoskeleton. Specific examples include blastomere
chirality, which dictates L/R body asymmetry at or before the
eight-cell stage in C. elegans embryos and dextral versus sinistral
shell coiling in snails, and myosin31DF as a key player in con-
trolling directionality of gut looping in Drosophila. Wan et al.
[28] also critically review cell chirality, focusing on in vitro cell
systems involving microprinting and degradable hydrogels
as well as mathematical models of biophysical mechanisms
that have been used to probe multicellular chirality and its
propagation during collective cell migration. In addition, they
discuss a recently developed three-dimensional spheroid
rotation assay that can be used to determine chirality of less
adhesive cells. As chirality appears to be an intrinsic property
of all cells, and is readily demonstrable with experimental
micropatterning systems, one intriguing application of this
phenomenon is use of cell chirality as an endpoint in screening
for nanomaterial toxicity and putative teratogens.

An important avenue for future work is the development
of computational models that reveal how large-scale body
plans arise from the activities of single cells. In the L/R asym-
metry field, this amounts to multi-scale biophysical models
that quantitatively explain the integration of chiral cell beha-
viours towards whole body axes. Recent work has begun this
task [20,23,29-31], and the contribution by Martinez et al.
[32] extends the effort to patterns of plant leaf asymmetry.
Analysis of several mutants with spiral phyllotaxis found
the mirrored patterns of L/R leaflet displacement as pre-
dicted by the model, as were the results of analysis of leaf
pair shapes in plants with distichous phyllotaxis. The
model was based on the dynamic of fluxes in auxin concen-
trations, which is interesting, because auxin is a signalling
molecule very similar to serotonin—a neurotransmitter with
important L/R patterning roles [33].

For L/R axis patterning, clearly, laterality-specifying
genes and their precise regulation are required. But how
does a cell regulate laterality gene expression according to
whether it lies on the left versus right side of the embryo?
Transcriptional processes cannot distinguish spatial direc-
tions by themselves, and any gene regulatory circuit has to
be painted onto a shape that is in part dictated by physical
forces. In the L/R axis, regardless of which of the initiation
models turns out to be correct, a microscopic, physical
process (structure of cytoskeletal or DNA elements) is ampli-
fied into signals across whole cell fields. This is an important
example of biological information processing, as chiral phys-
ical elements provide direction (e.g. leftward or clockwise),
whereas L/R-asymmetric gene expression requires position
(left side relative to midline). During the early phases of
asymmetry, the embryo converts microscopic directional
cues into macroscopic positional cues, which feed into differ-
ential cascades of gene expression on the L and R sides.
Burdine and Grimes [34] exploit the strength of the zebrafish
model system, performing a large number of elegant
transplantation and ablation studies in mutant lines that
show how events in the zebrafish L/R organizer result
in the reliable unilateral expression of key L/R patterning
genes. These events involve tissue interactions between the
notochord, lateral plate mesoderm and the Kupffer's vesicle,
revealing how the transcriptional cascades operate in the


[PAGE 4] 

context of a complex embryo that is simultaneously patterning
numerous other aspects. An essential component is the notion
of midline; the midline is essential for defining asymmetry in
the first place, but how an early embryo bisects itself in a con-
sistent manner is a key unanswered question. Asymmetric cell
division occurring very early on to bisect the embryo, followed
by each laterality-specified daughter cell's progenies executing
the specific left- versus right-sided developmental programme,
should be considered as one of the possibilities.

In addition to an essential role in maintaining L/R asym-
metry, midline interactions also simultaneously operate to
preserve symmetry in bilaterally paired organs that arise from
lateral tissues. Robichaux et al. [35] explore this in the context
of mammary gland development in mice lacking a functional
allele for an A/P patterning gene, retinoid X receptor alpha
(RXRa). In this study, the authors demonstrate that the geneti-
cally engineered haploinsufficiency in the RXRa locus causes a
substantial fraction of mammary glands (in approx. 50% of all
animals analysed) to demonstrate distinct patterning asymmetry
when left breast tissues are compared with their right counter-
parts, as evidenced by quantifying such anatomic parameters
as ductal network area, density of terminal end buds and
branch points, and relative mass of gland tissue. No variances
in L/R morphometrics were present in wild-type mice carrying
both functional RXRa alleles. Even more notably, in RXRx+/-
animals, the effect was restricted to thoracic mammary glands
but not detected in inguinal mammary glands, an observation
that underscores previously made assumptions of differential
tissue response to retinoid-mediated signalling along the A/P
axis. As parenchymal L/R asymmetry in breast tissue is an
early and sensitive predictor of breast cancer risk, this study
suggests that heightened risk for neoplasia may actually be
rooted in L/R asymmetric tissue disorganization that results
from relatively subtle embryonic axial patterning defects.

Two laterality genes with highly conserved expression
and function in midline and lateral patterning events include
Nodal and Pitx2. Martin-Duran et al. [36] cover evolution of
L/R asymmetry of spiralians, which includes the most cele-
brated phenotype of the direction of coiling of snail shells,
which they associate with embryonic chirality. In this study,
they describe in detail the pattern of gene expression of a
Nodal orthologue in a brachiopod species and the pattern of
PitX orthologues expression in an annelid and pripulid
species. Their description helps us appreciate the evidence
depicting patterning of L/R asymmetries in early embryonic
cell lineages of the Spiralia group. Studies of these taxa indi-
cate that embryonic chirality is a widespread feature of
development, and this investigation highlights the features
of asymmetric Nodal and Pitx2 orthologue expression in
embryonic cells even in species that develop without obvious
adult L/R asymmetries. From their description, it is appreci-
ated that the Nodal signalling pathway functioned even in
the ancestors of all bilaterally symmetric animals. Consistent
with other studies presented in this issue, Martin-Duran et al.
[36] demonstrate that Nodal and Pitx genes are not expressed
in the earliest cleavage stages of the embryo, indicating that a
separate upstream genetic mechanism defines the L/R axis in
spiralian embryos. Indeed, a recent study has demonstrated
that the cytoskeleton formin gene (ldia2) dictates the handed-
ness of shell coiling through its differential expression at the
two-cell stage of the embryo [37]. Thus, as in other species,
such a very early embryonic symmetry-breaking event must
influence expression of genes such as Nodal for L/R axis


[PAGE 5] 

specification to occur later on. The next challenge is to define
how such very early decisions control later L/R axis pro-
grammes later on during embryogenesis.

Also focused on Nodal, Signore et al. [38] take a comparative
approach to cover the role of this pathway in the development
of nervous system asymmetries in fish and ascidian species.
These authors make an important distinction between Nodal
as a laterality inducer and Nodal as a modulator of pre-existing
identity, and describe experimental conditions in which the pre-
cise role of Nodal can be investigated. The main lesson spelled
out is that bilaterally paired and midline-unpaired structures
respond differently to perturbations of Nodal expression.
Therefore, effects on paired structures should be interpreted
separately from effects on unpaired strictures. These lessons
can be applied to other systems for defining the role of Nodal
signalling, such as for mammalian visceral and brain hemi-
spheric laterality specification.

Subsequently, physics enters the picture again, as asym-
metric protein products ultimately ensure distinct tension,
stretching and bending forces that implement asymmetric mor-
phogenesis. L/R patterning is thus not only an example of multi-
scale integration, but also of the continuous interplay of physics
and genetics, aspects that are ubiquitous in living systems and
yet still poorly understood. Another way in which L/R asymme-
try sheds light on biology beyond embryonic laterality is in the
implications for regenerative repair. McDowell et al. [39] report
that the L/R transcriptional cascade, which is known to be
highly conserved, has the capability of self-repair: early treat-
ments that efficiently randomize early asymmetric genes such
as the left-sided nodal often give rise to a smaller percentage
of embryos with abnormal sidedness of downstream genes
such as Lefty or Pitx2, and an even smaller percentage of ani-
mals with abnormal organ laterality. This reveals that
although molecular functional data in specific assays identify
genes necessary and sufficient for induction of the downstream
genes (e.g. the Nodal → Lefty → Pitx2 cascade), the story in vivo
is more complex, owing to the presence of parallel repair path-
ways that can apparently detect and reverse molecular
abnormalities, so that subsequent steps have normal laterality.
Despite advances made in identifying many of the cellular
and molecular processes that control L/R axis determination,
the genetic aetiology of L/R asymmetry disorders remains
largely unknown. Whereas the majority of human laterality
defects are believed to be sporadic, there is also an appreciable
incidence of heritable transmission, including X-linked,
autosomal dominant and autosomal recessive modes. As dis-
cussed by Cowan et al. [40], familial studies have led to
identification of mutations in Nodal and other L/R patterning
genes (e.g. ZIC3); however, surprisingly, these mutations
underlie only a minority of sporadic heterotaxy cases. To identity
additional causes, Cowan et al. [40] used array-based genotyping
methods to discover that nearly 20% of patients with heterotaxy
and heterotaxy-associated congenital heart defects have copy
number variants (CNVs) in their genome. As analysis included
only affected individuals but not their parents, it is unclear
whether CNVs result from de novo mutations or if they are
familially inherited. Regardless, a number of genes with cilia-
related functions, including TTC21B, CEP290, TTBK2 and
CFPAP126, were implicated for L/R anomalies. Duplications
or deletion of several other loci have been identified. One interest-
ing case is that of phosphofructokinase-1 (PFKP), a gene whose
heterotaxy pathogenesis was confirmed by morpholino-based
experiments in Xenopus laevis. This enzymatic activity is required
for glycolysis, raising the question of how could it be involved in
L/R asymmetry development? The authors speculate that there
is a non-glycolytic role of PFKP in L/R patterning because its
isoforms are known to bind the a-subunit of H+-V-ATPase, a
membrane-bound proton pump implicated in laterality determi-
nation in Xenopus and chick. Given the success achieved in this
study, future continued study of additional human subjects is
anticipated to be highly rewarding.

[PAGE 5] 

Genetic analysis of heterotaxy is also being conducted by
Alcorn et al. [41], who use C. elegans in their search for disease
loci. The commonly used laboratory strain of this nematode
exhibits a stereotypical gut-gonad L/R asymmetry that has
been shown to be established during early embryogenesis,
i.e. during the division of the two anterior granddaughter
cells of four-cell stage embryo. In examining nearly 100 evolu-
tionarily diverged isolates of this species, Alcorn et al. [41]
discovered that there is naturally existing variation in L/R
organ asymmetry, and moreover, that some species exhibit
heterotaxy in up to 11-12% of the animals. By conducting gen-
etic crosses of lines showing normal L/R situs with lines
showing heterotaxy, these investigators found that heterotaxy
is associated with three genomic regions. Moreover, they
report that temperature elevation prior to gastrulation can
cause heterotaxy, consistent with an early embryonic sym-
metry-breaking event existing in this research model organism.
In addition to gut-gonad asymmetry, nervous system
asymmetry can be readily investigated in C. elegans. Laterality
of the nervous system is observed across many species, includ-
ing brain hemispheric laterality development in humans that is
driven by poorly defined mechanisms. Focusing on the pair
of amphid wing 'C' (AWC) olfactory neurons in C. elegans,
Alqadah et al. [42] review recent progress made in defining
the mechanisms that regulate their functional and molecular
L/R asymmetric development. The AWC neuron pair differen-
tiates asymmetrically into AWCON and AWCOFF subtypes,
which sense different odours, and curiously these two neurons
are randomly (stochastically) distributed with respect to the
L/R axis. The AWC asymmetry is established by exposure of
cells to different levels of calcium signalling during embryo-
genesis, and following this specification neuronal identities
are maintained throughout the life of the animal. Because of
its genetic tractability and the simplicity of its nervous system's
laterality, C. elegans has emerged as a powerful model organ-
ism to define molecular mechanisms of neuronal asymmetry
and the laterality of gut and gonad organs. Very interesting
mutations that affect the neuronal asymmetry development
are highlighted in the review. The authors note that, as
found in studies of AWC asymmetry in the nematode, calcium
signalling is implicated in L/R organ patterning in vertebrates.


[PAGE 5] Concluding remarks

L/R asymmetry is one of the most exciting problems under
investigation in modern biology. Far from being solved, recent
progress only highlights the remarkable opportunities high-
lighted by this aspect of pattern formation. A study of L/R
asymmetry, in its deep aspects, will reward not only the
novice student of biology, but also the seasoned expert in
other fields. Spanning scales of organization, from cell to
whole organism, and disciplines, from evolution to cell biology
to clinical medicine, it provides fertile ground for research for
generations of workers to come. Biological asymmetry's

Downloaded from https://royalsocietypublishing.org/ on 02 August 2025
specification to occur later on. The next challenge is to define
how such very early decisions control later L/R axis pro-
grammes later on during embryogenesis.

Also focused on Nodal, Signore et al. [38] take a comparative
approach to cover the role of this pathway in the development
of nervous system asymmetries in fish and ascidian species.
These authors make an important distinction between Nodal
as a laterality inducer and Nodal as a modulator of pre-existing
identity, and describe experimental conditions in which the pre-
cise role of Nodal can be investigated. The main lesson spelled
out is that bilaterally paired and midline-unpaired structures
respond differently to perturbations of Nodal expression.
Therefore, effects on paired structures should be interpreted
separately from effects on unpaired strictures. These lessons
can be applied to other systems for defining the role of Nodal
signalling, such as for mammalian visceral and brain hemi-
spheric laterality specification.

Subsequently, physics enters the picture again, as asym-
metric protein products ultimately ensure distinct tension,
stretching and bending forces that implement asymmetric mor-
phogenesis. L/R patterning is thus not only an example of multi-
scale integration, but also of the continuous interplay of physics
and genetics, aspects that are ubiquitous in living systems and
yet still poorly understood. Another way in which L/R asymme-
try sheds light on biology beyond embryonic laterality is in the
implications for regenerative repair. McDowell et al. [39] report
that the L/R transcriptional cascade, which is known to be
highly conserved, has the capability of self-repair: early treat-
ments that efficiently randomize early asymmetric genes such
as the left-sided nodal often give rise to a smaller percentage
of embryos with abnormal sidedness of downstream genes
such as Lefty or Pitx2, and an even smaller percentage of ani-
mals with abnormal organ laterality. This reveals that
although molecular functional data in specific assays identify
genes necessary and sufficient for induction of the downstream
genes (e.g. the Nodal → Lefty → Pitx2 cascade), the story in vivo
is more complex, owing to the presence of parallel repair path-
ways that can apparently detect and reverse molecular
abnormalities, so that subsequent steps have normal laterality.

Despite advances made in identifying many of the cellular
and molecular processes that control L/R axis determination,
the genetic aetiology of L/R asymmetry disorders remains
largely unknown. Whereas the majority of human laterality
defects are believed to be sporadic, there is also an appreciable
incidence of heritable transmission, including X-linked,
autosomal dominant and autosomal recessive modes. As dis-
cussed by Cowan et al. [40], familial studies have led to
identification of mutations in Nodal and other L/R patterning
genes (e.g. ZIC3); however, surprisingly, these mutations
underlie only a minority of sporadic heterotaxy cases. To identity
additional causes, Cowan et al. [40] used array-based genotyping
methods to discover that nearly 20% of patients with heterotaxy
and heterotaxy-associated congenital heart defects have copy
number variants (CNVs) in their genome. As analysis included
only affected individuals but not their parents, it is unclear
whether CNVs result from de novo mutations or if they are
familially inherited. Regardless, a number of genes with cilia-
related functions, including TTC21B, CEP290, TTBK2 and
CFPAP126, were implicated for L/R anomalies. Duplications
or deletion of several other loci have been identified. One interest-
ing case is that of phosphofructokinase-1 (PFKP), a gene whose
heterotaxy pathogenesis was confirmed by morpholino-based
experiments in Xenopus laevis. This enzymatic activity is required
for glycolysis, raising the question of how could it be involved in
L/R asymmetry development? The authors speculate that there
is a non-glycolytic role of PFKP in L/R patterning because its
isoforms are known to bind the a-subunit of H+-V-ATPase, a
membrane-bound proton pump implicated in laterality determi-
nation in Xenopus and chick. Given the success achieved in this
study, future continued study of additional human subjects is
anticipated to be highly rewarding.

Genetic analysis of heterotaxy is also being conducted by
Alcorn et al. [41], who use C. elegans in their search for disease
loci. The commonly used laboratory strain of this nematode
exhibits a stereotypical gut-gonad L/R asymmetry that has
been shown to be established during early embryogenesis,
i.e. during the division of the two anterior granddaughter
cells of four-cell stage embryo. In examining nearly 100 evolu-
tionarily diverged isolates of this species, Alcorn et al. [41]
discovered that there is naturally existing variation in L/R
organ asymmetry, and moreover, that some species exhibit
heterotaxy in up to 11-12% of the animals. By conducting gen-
etic crosses of lines showing normal L/R situs with lines
showing heterotaxy, these investigators found that heterotaxy
is associated with three genomic regions. Moreover, they
report that temperature elevation prior to gastrulation can
cause heterotaxy, consistent with an early embryonic sym-
metry-breaking event existing in this research model organism.
In addition to gut-gonad asymmetry, nervous system
asymmetry can be readily investigated in C. elegans. Laterality
of the nervous system is observed across many species, includ-
ing brain hemispheric laterality development in humans that is
driven by poorly defined mechanisms. Focusing on the pair
of amphid wing 'C' (AWC) olfactory neurons in C. elegans,
Alqadah et al. [42] review recent progress made in defining
the mechanisms that regulate their functional and molecular
L/R asymmetric development. The AWC neuron pair differen-
tiates asymmetrically into AWCON and AWCOFF subtypes,
which sense different odours, and curiously these two neurons
are randomly (stochastically) distributed with respect to the
L/R axis. The AWC asymmetry is established by exposure of
cells to different levels of calcium signalling during embryo-
genesis, and following this specification neuronal identities
are maintained throughout the life of the animal. Because of
its genetic tractability and the simplicity of its nervous system's
laterality, C. elegans has emerged as a powerful model organ-
ism to define molecular mechanisms of neuronal asymmetry
and the laterality of gut and gonad organs. Very interesting
mutations that affect the neuronal asymmetry development
are highlighted in the review. The authors note that, as
found in studies of AWC asymmetry in the nematode, calcium
signalling is implicated in L/R organ patterning in vertebrates.

[PAGE 7] 3. Concluding remarks

L/R asymmetry is one of the most exciting problems under
investigation in modern biology. Far from being solved, recent
progress only highlights the remarkable opportunities high-
lighted by this aspect of pattern formation. A study of L/R
asymmetry, in its deep aspects, will reward not only the
novice student of biology, but also the seasoned expert in
other fields. Spanning scales of organization, from cell to
whole organism, and disciplines, from evolution to cell biology
to clinical medicine, it provides fertile ground for research for
generations of workers to come. Biological asymmetry's
fundamental feature is the continuous, tight integration of
physical and genetic mechanisms; understanding this is a fun-
damental challenge, while learning to exploit it will enable
powerful new roadmaps for biomedicine.