Ion Channel and Pump Function in Planarian
Regeneration
Tim Hsiau
under the direction of
Dr. Michael Levin
The Forsyth Insitute
Research Science Institute
July 29, 2003


Abstract
Regeneration is the process in which lost tissues are recovered through differentiation
of stem cells kept in storage. A pharmacological screen in the organism planaria identified
several channels as requisite for normal regeneration. Inhibition of eag potassium channels
was shown to disrupt the initiation of regeneration, whereas inhibition of the H+/K+-ATPase
pump and the minK voltage-dependent potassium channel caused eye defects in regenerates.
Together, these results suggest an important role for potassium signalling and potassium-
induced electrical potentials in regeneration.

[PAGE 3] Introduction
Complex structures are generated from fertilized eggs during the process of animal devel-
opment. Key events, such as establishment of the left-right body axis, hinge on genetic
cascades which commit cells to certain fates and determine their temporal and spatial posi-
tion. Regeneration is a process similar to development in which lost tissues are replaced by
the differentiation of stem cells maintained in the adult. It may utilize the same molecular
mechanisms involved in embryonic development. Regeneration is well-documented in flat-
worms, earthworms, and frogs but has also been shown to occur in humans in limited cases
[2]. Research into regeneration in model organisms would provide invaluable information
for stem cell therapeutics, which aims to prompt regeneration from either pluripotent adult
cells or totipotent stem cells. However, much has to be learned about the events upstream
of the genetic cascades.
Electrical polarity on the organismic level is known to be present during regeneration and
development [2]. Cells as diverse as amphibian neural crest cells [22], fish keratocytes [23],
bone cells [24], and cornea epithelial cells [21] have been shown to respond to small electrical
fields of the mV/mm order. Studies as early as 1979 on frogs with inserted subdermal
shunts have shown that an endogenous electric field is necessary for proper regeneration
[5]. Reversal of the endogenous electrical field also causes a reversal in morphology during
regeneration [6]. Reports of corneal cells cleaving perpendicular to the electric field direction
are especially intriguing as they show that some developmental mechanisms are responsive
to, and perhaps dependent on, electrical fields.
Such an electrical polarity arises from asymmetric distributions of ions and also possesses
field properties carrying positional and directional information. Ion fluxes, or electrical cur-
rents, are requisite to maintain this polarity and were first observed by Jaffe and Nuccitelli
in 1977 [19]. It was hypothesized by Morgan as early as 1905 that gradients of diffusible

[PAGE 4] 
determinants guide proper execution of body plan by specifying spatial information [7]. How-
ever, the discovery of homeobox genes; elucidation of morphogens such as BMP; and recent
reports of developmental dependency on ion pumps and gap junctions in model organisms
such as Drosophila have increased the complexity of the basic model [2, 8, 9]. More recent
reports utilizing molecular biology techniques have begun to elucidate the crucial upstream
role of electrical potentials in directing proper developmental patterning by influencing the
complex actions of differentiation, migration, and intercellular attaching [2, 3].
Ion gradients may induce asymmetric gene expression through several possible mecha-
nisms. First, the ion concentration or the resultant electrical field may act as the carrier
of positional information. Second, ion gradients may electrostatically attract charged mor-
phogens such as calcium or inositol triphosphate through gap junctions. Lastly, ion asymme-
tries could activate voltage-gated gap junctions and allow intercellular communication to take
place [27]. Whatever the initiating factor, the resultant morphogens then initiate a cascade
that eventually results in differential gene expression. All of these steps require intensive
intercellular communication and coordination. Therefore, we wish to test the hypothesis
that ion pumps, ion channels, and gap junction channels play critical roles in regeneration.
Unfortunately, classical models of development such as Drosophila and C. elegans either
have limited regenerative capabilities or lack them altogether [10]. A better model for exten-
sive studies of regeneration would be planaria. Planaria, free-living flatworms, are one of the
simplest animals that exhibits bilateral symmetry and cephalization and the weight ratio of
brain to body is similar to that of a rat [28]. Due to these attributes, planarian research
would elucidate many mechanisms that should be conserved in higher organisms. Planaria
are well suited for detailed molecular studies of regeneration as they are easy to maintain
and normally regenerate within one week after being cut. Although frogs are commonly used
for regeneration studies, they require more than a month to regenerate, which is in stark
contrast with the planaria's ability to regenerate within a week [10]. Additionally, planaria

[PAGE 5] 
are amenable to many modern techniques such as RNAi, fluorescent imaging, and in situ
hybridization. Regeneration may be artificially induced via cutting. After cutting, wound
closure starts immediately and completes within hours. By the second day after cutting or
fissioning, blastemas (structures where stem cells differentiate) can be seen and eyes appear
on regenerating trunk segments as early as the third day.
Previously, a pharmacologic screen successfully identified H+/K+-ATPase as being criti-
cal for asymmetric electric potentials upstream of left-right patterning in Xenopus embryos
[3]. Using this technique, we wish to determine which pumps are crucial to regeneration and
also to validate the necessity of gap junction channels in regeneration. The pharmacologic
screen enabled the exposure of large numbers of regenerating planaria to a wide variety
of specific pharmacologic agents, and the observation of results within two weeks or less.
Additionally, the planarian regeneration process is very robust, and thus is suitable for ex-
posure to drugs that are oftentimes toxic at high concentrations. These combined factors
enable planarian pharmacological screens to achieve medium throughput at a relatively low

[PAGE 3] Figure 1: Planaria possess a simple central nervous system (CNS), digestive system, and
cephalization. The double-sided arrows indicate the anterior-posterior, dorsal-ventral, and
right-left axes. Image courtesy of Levin, M.


[PAGE 4] 2 Methodology

2.1 Planarian Care
Isogenic Dugesia japonica planaria derived from a single worm were used for this screen. The
planaria were kept in 20cm×12cm×6cm plastic containers at 22°C in spring water (Poland
Spring) and fed organic chicken liver twice a week. The planaria were allowed to feed for
three hours, after which excess liver was removed and the water then exchanged for fresh
spring water.

[PAGE 5] Figure 3: Planaria were cut into head (left), trunk (middle), and tail (right) segments to
initiate regeneration.

2.2 Drug Treatment and Scoring
A broad range of drugs was used in this screen to determine which ion channels and pumps
were necessary for regeneration. Based on an earlier, preliminary screen, pharmacological
agents were chosen to target H+ and K+ pumps and channels. Many of the drugs used in
this screening were previously developed for and successfully characterized in neuroscience
studies. The drugs were initially tried at concentrations known to not be toxic to Xenopus
embryos and/or at the maximum non-toxic concentration of DMSO (dimethylsulfoxide; used
for vehicle to dissolve certain water-insoluble drugs). Concentrations were then lowered if
toxic, and raised if not toxic or if no phenotype was observed (See Appendix A for a compre-
hensive list of the different concentrations) [3]. Drugs giving rise to aberrant regeneration
in the preliminary screen were then given to a larger sample of worms for more detailed
analysis.

Mature (non-regenerating) planaria were starved for at least four days, cut with a sterile
razor blade into head, pharynx, and tail pieces on ice (which initiated regeneration) and
then placed in spring water or 0.125% DMSO to serve as controls. Batches of 15 or more
worms were similarly prepared and placed in 40 mL petri dishes containing drugs dissolved
in spring water. In all cases where DMSO was necessary for dissolving water insoluble
drugs, the DMSO level never went above 0.125%, a concentration known to allow normal
regeneration [T. Nogi, personal communication]. Drugs were diluted from stock solution and
then vortexed. The planaria were starved and incubated at 22°C in drug solution for at least
three days, after which the drug solution was changed for spring water if dirty. Planaria were
visually inspected for signs of abnormal regeneration under a dissecting microscope daily.
Planaria were placed on ice and imaged with a SMZ1500 microscope (Nikon) with coolsnap
cf digital camera (Photometrics) and captured with OpenLab 3.1.2 software (Improvision).
Images were then processed using The GIMP (GNU Image Manipulation Program) when
necessary to enhance contrast and detail.


[PAGE 6] 3 Results

3.1 DMSO controls
DMSO was shown to produce a small but significant (x² analysis, p<0.05) level (4%, n=25) of
eye abnormalities in regenerating planaria. However, DMSO was ruled out as a confounding
factor for the results of DMT, PG, and HMR-1556 treated planaria. In the case of DMT,
the scored phenotype, inhibition of regeneration, did not involve aberrant eye regeneration.
PG did not require DMSO as a vehicle and therefore the eye defects seen in PG-treated
planaria could be attributed to the effects of PG alone. Although eye defects were scored for
HMR-1556, planaria were exposed to a level of vehicle an order of magnitude lower than that
required to produce eye defects, therefore involvement of DMSO in abnormal regeneration
could be ignored.

3.2 DMT inhibits regeneration
Dimethadione (DMT) is a selective blocker of the voltage-gated hERG potassium channel.
At 0.125%, DMT selectively caused the death of tail and head fragments but not trunk
fragments, and also inhibited formation of head and tail blastemas in the surviving trunk
sections. DMT is extraordinarily specific in its actions; the three-day survival rate of head
and tail segments was 0% (n=40) whereas the three-day survival rate of trunk segments


[PAGE 7] Figure 4: Dimethadione inhibits regeneration. After five days of treatment, no blastemas
were observed in DMT-treated trunks (A-D), here compared with matched control head (B)
and tail (C) which do possess blastema (lighter pigmented areas).

[PAGE 8] 
was 97% (n=40). Comparison with control data indicated a significant effect (x² analysis,
p<0.005). This phenomenon was also observed at the 0.11%, 0.1%, and 0.083% DMT levels
but tapered off at 0.0556% and was not observed at the 0.042% level or below. Although
trunk segments are usually larger in volume than their head and tail counterparts, trials were
run with planaria of varying sizes, suggesting that the size of the head and tail segments
was not a confounding factor. These results indicate that the planarian homolog of the eag
potassium channel possibly is necessary for housekeeping functions in the tail and head,
but not in the trunk. Whole planaria (n=15) exposed to DMT all died, perhaps due to
apoptotic signals transmitted to the trunk by the head and trunk. Another possibility is
that the regenerative process confers a protective property on the trunk segment.

The effects of DMT on regeneration seem to be reversible. In all of the trunk segments,
head and tail blastemas were not produced and regeneration was inhibited. As long as the
segments were maintained in DMT, regeneration did not occur. However, when placed back
into spring water, regeneration occurred (Fig. 5). This may be due to the upregulation of
eag as the cells recycle the blocked channels.


[PAGE 8] 3.3 Disruption of eye formation by Prodigiosin and HMR-1556
Tail fragments subjected to prodigiosin (PG) at 0.125% regenerated with eye defects (35%,
n=40), died (55%), or regenerated normally (10%), whereas head and trunk segments re-
generated normally. X² analysis revealed a significant effect (p< 0.005). Most of the regen-
erates exhibited a cyclops (a single eye situated on the anterior-posterior axis) phenotype,
although other aberrant eye regenerates were also observed (Fig. 7). Prodigiosin at higher
levels (0.25%) was lethal, whereas lower levels (7.5×10-2% and 2.5×10-2%) did not produce
any abnormal eye regenerates.

HMR-1556 a Iks blocker [13], showed low levels (14%, n=35) of randomized eye defects at
1.25×10-2%. X² analysis showed this level to be significant (p<0.05, matched with 1.25×10-2% DMSO control). Approximately equal numbers of cyclops and three-eyed planaria were observed. Higher levels (1.56×10-2% to 0.125%) showed normal regeneration, indicating that there exists an effective window of the drug outside of which no phenotype is seen.


[PAGE 11] Figure 7: Prodigiosin-treated tail segments regenerated with one eye. Here A, B, and C have completed regeneration and are seen at 11 days. Regenerating tail segments mostly exhibited a cyclops phenotype seen in D, E, F.


[PAGE 12] 3.4 Drugs which do not disrupt regeneration
The drugs skelid, NeM, SB-242784, THB, PHM, diazoxide, pinacidil, DIDS, DCCD, gly-
cyrrhetinic acid, lindane, and arachidonic acid did not produce aberrant regenerates. Pla-
naria exposed to differing concentrations of the drugs either died or regenerated normally.
One SB-242784-treated planaria did exhibit abnormal eye regeneration, but x² analysis
showed this to be insignificant (p>0.2).

[PAGE 12] 4 Discussion
The planarian pharmacological screen is an effective, fast, and relatively inexpensive method
of searching for ion channels and pumps crucial to regeneration. However, there exist sev-
eral inherent disadvantages of the pharmacological screen. The action of drugs designed
for vertebrate channels and pumps on invertebrate homologs has not been fully character-
ized, and some drugs may lose their potency when used in invertebrates. Additionally, the
pharmacological screen is a positive only test, since it relies on a premise that there is a
concentration of the drug that will not be toxic, but will still perturb normal regeneration.
Therefore, negative results returned by drugs such as PHM do not rule out the involvement
of the associated ion channels and pumps with regeneration.
There are Drosophila (eag) and C. elegans (egl-2) homologs of hERG, and a BLAST
search on the Sánchez planarian EST database (http://planaria.neuro.utah.edu/) with
the egl-2 cDNA sequence revealed a sequence AY068378 [25]. However, the effects of DMT,
designed to block hERG, on invertebrate homologs has not been fully characterized. eag is an
outwardly-rectifying, voltage-dependent channel. That is, it only allows outwards potassium
flow and is activated only when a voltage is present.

[PAGE 14] Potassium channels other than eag may be involved in directing regeneration. Perhaps a
potassium flux generated by eag channels is crucial for the global voltage gradient seen im-
mediately after injury. This voltage gradient would then direct intercellular communication
through gap junction channels and specify proper anterior-posterior regeneration. Detailed
analysis of eag channel function with other pharmacologic agents and RNAi is necessary.
PG inhibits H+/K+-ATPase, a pump already shown to be involved in the proper devel-
opment of left-right asymmetry [3]. Here, we see that it is necessary for definition of the
left-right axis in the head. H+/K+-ATPase may play a role in creating a gradient that is
later used to properly situate eyes. Voltage imaging with DiBAC dye should be conducted
to further test this hypothesis.
HMR-1556 targets the potassium channel KvLQT and caused 14% (n=35) of eye defects
in tail regenerates, with the majority being the regeneration of a three-eye or cyclops phe-
notype. Combined with eye defects resulting from PG, it is clear that potassium flux plays
an important role in direction of eye development.
Research into electrical direction of patterning may shed light on important health issues
such as cancer and magnetic fields. As cancer is also a disease of morphology, investigation
into the controls of cell proliferation and differentiation will provide new insight as to what
goes awry in cancer. It is long known that tumor cells may be distinguished from normal
cells based on their ion content [30]. Cancerous cells also differ from normal cells in the
types of ion channels and pumps that they express and it was found that these membrane
proteins also control cell proliferation rate [31, 32]. eag may be such a channel, as it has
been reported that hERG potassium channels are more frequently expressed in cancerous
tissue [12]. Combined with our results, it is clear that the role of normal eag function in
controlling the pace of cellular growth and the development of correct morphology should
be investigated further.
Due to the Lorentz Force Law (in its simplest form, F=qu×B) magnetic fields effect a
force on moving charges and may affect normal development. With the advent of modern technology,
magnetic fields have become pervasive in the human environment. As it is clear that ion
fluxes are involved in directing growth, further research should be conducted to probe the
possible health issues of magnetic fields.


[PAGE 15] 5 Conclusion
This study successfully applied a pharmacological screen using 15 drugs on over 1000 planaria
to study the regenerative importance of 10 pumps and channels. Several of the targeted
pumps and channels were indicated to be crucial to proper regeneration, especially of the
head. Three drugs indicated by the screen to have disrupted normal regeneration were
dimethadione, prodigiosin, and HMR-1556. As all three inhibit a K+ pump or channel,
these results indicate an important role for potassium flux in the process of regeneration.

[PAGE 15] 6 Acknowledgments
Special thanks goes to Dr. Michael Levin for his generous gift of mentorship; The Forsyth
Institute for accommodating the author; Taisaku Nogi for his tutelage on planarian care and
preparation; Emily Yuan and Debra Sorocco for expert technical assistance; Yi-Ching Ong,
the author's tutor; other critical readers of the manuscript, including Josh G and Jane M;
and the Center for Excellence in Education and MIT for co-sponsoring the Research Science
Institute.


[PAGE 19] A List of Drug Concentrations

Table 1: Drugs and Concentrations


[PAGE 20] 

Table 1: (continued on next page)


[PAGE 21] 

Table 1: (continued on next page)