[PAGE 1] METHODS AND COMPOSITIONS FOR
PROMOTING REGENERATION BY
INCREASING INTRACELLULAR SODIUM
CONCENTRATION

ABSTRACT
The invention provides methods and compositions for
increasing the intracellular sodium concentration in a cell.

[PAGE 5] Figure 4
Regenerative Non-regenerative Conditions (bud depolarized)
Control
Na-inhibited
Control
Control Nay-inhibited
Notch (48 hpa)
Msx1 (48 hpa)
DIBAC (3)
(24 hpa)
Relatively
Negative
Relatively
25%
50% 75% 100%

[PAGE 5] Figure 5
18 hpa
19 hpa (refractory)
Refractory
Regenerative
7 dpa
Na+
Induction
Control
0%
50%
Phenotype Frequency
Na' Current
Induction
Control
100%

[PAGE 6] Figure 6
6 hours
Tail Amputation
6 hours
V-ATPase Dependent H* flux
Control of
Regeneration Bud
Physiology
Na 1.2 RNAL,
MS-222
Na 1.2 activity
18 hours
Control of Na' Flux
In Regeneration Bud
24 hours
manexin
BMP, Notch, Msx, Wnt, and Fgfs
Proliferative/Outgrowth
Morphogenesis
7 days
Completion of tail regeneration

[PAGE 7] Figure 7
Amputation
Polarized cells
Na+
Proliferating cells
V-ATPase
6 hpa
Bud
polarized
Na+
Na 1.2
Bud
depolarized
Induced Na+
Current
18 hpa
Na+ influx
24 hpa
Activation of
outgrowth and
patterning
pathways
Sgk1
Non-functional
epidermis
Completion of
Regeneration
Wound Healing
Only

[PAGE 8] Figure 8
Effect on Tail Regeneration
Frequency of Phenotype
60%
50%
40%
30%
20%
10%
0%
Full
Good
Poor
Phenotype (Quality of Regeneration)
None
Insulin
Control

Effect on Tail Regeneration



METHODS AND COMPOSITIONS FOR
PROMOTING REGENERATION BY
INCREASING INTRACELLULAR SODIUM
CONCENTRATION

RELATED APPLICATIONS
[0001] This application claims the benefit of priority to
U.S. provisional application No. 61/273,193, filed Jul. 31,
2009, the disclosure of which is hereby incorporated by ref-
erence in its entirety.

BACKGROUND OF THE INVENTION
[0002] Humans have limited ability to repair injured or
damaged organs while newts and salamanders can regenerate
multiple structures such as the heart and limbs (Birnbaum and
Alvarado, 2008). A molecular understanding of the regenera-
tive capacities of such species would greatly facilitate the
development of therapies to repair human tissues upon dis-
ease or injury (Gardiner, 2005; Ingber and Levin, 2007).
Much effort has recently gone into identifying and character-
izing stem cells with the promise of therapeutics that may
induce regeneration in humans (Stocum and Zupanc, 2008).
In parallel, work has also been focused on understanding the
natural molecular pathways that drive regeneration in animals
that have such innate abilities (Slack, 2003; Yokoyama,
2008). One of these models is the anuran amphibian, Xenopus
laevis, which has the ability to fully restore its developmental
appendages upon injury (Beck et al., 2009; Tseng and Levin,
2008).
[0003] The Xenopus tail is a complex organ containing
multiple cell types including muscle, nerve, spinal cord, and
vasculature. It is transparent and easily accessible for experi-
mentation. Notably, amputated tadpole tails will regenerate
fully by 7 days. Appendage regeneration consists of three
major steps. First, wound healing of the injury site occurs
within 6-8 hours post amputation (hpa). By 24 hpa, an initial
swelling is formed at the injury site called the regeneration
bud, consisting of progenitor cells. Subsequently, tissue out-
growth and patterning begin as the tail is rebuilt. Lineage
studies strongly indicate that each tissue is reconstituted from
its own specific progenitor cells (Chen et al., 2006; Gargioli
and Slack, 2004); no metaplasia has been observed in this
system, suggesting its tissue renewal mechanisms are an
attractive model for augmentation of organ repair in man. To
date, several molecular components that regulate tail regen-
eration have been identified. TGF-beta signaling is required
for proper wound healing (Ho and Whitman, 2008). Signaling
pathways including BMP, Notch, Wnt, and Fgf are involved
in driving regenerative outgrowth and patterning (Beck et al.,
2006; Beck et al., 2003; Chen et al., 2006; Mochii et al.,
2007), recapitulating their well-characterized roles during
appendage development.

SUMMARY OF THE INVENTION
[0004] Much work has gone into understanding mecha-
nisms driving regeneration to develop biomedical interven-
tions that induce or augment regeneration in human patients.
The present disclosure stems from our novel approach to this
problem; instead of focusing on secreted biochemical factors,
we investigate the role of bioelectrical signals in regeneration.
The strategy is to modulate the appropriate changes in ion
flows to modulate regenerative response in a host tissue or
organism. As part of that, the present invention provides
methods and compositions for promoting tissue regeneration
by increasing the intracellular sodium concentration. Also,
the invention provides methods and compositions for inhib-
iting proliferation and/or migration of hyper-proliferative
cells by decreasing the intracellular concentration of sodium
in those hyper-proliferative cells.
[0005] In one aspect, the invention provides a method of
promoting one or more of proliferation or differentiation,
comprising contacting a cell culture with an effective amount
of an agent to increase intracellular sodium concentration in
cells of said cell culture, wherein said agent is selected from
a sodium ionophore, or insulin, or both, and wherein the agent
induces Na+ influx into said cell, thereby promoting one or
more of proliferation or differentiation.
[0006] In another aspect, the invention provides a method
of promoting tissue regeneration, comprising contacting a
cell culture with an effective amount of an agent to increase
intracellular sodium concentration in cells of said cell culture,
wherein said agent is selected from a sodium ionophore, or
insulin, or both, and wherein the agent induces Na+ influx into
said cell, thereby promoting tissue regeneration.
[0007] In some aspects, the invention provides use of an
agent for promoting one or more of proliferation or differen-
tiation, comprising administering an effective amount of an
agent, wherein said agent is selected from a sodium iono-
phore, or insulin, or both, and wherein the agent induces Na+
influx into cells, thereby promoting one or more of prolifera-
tion or differentiation.
[0008] In other aspects, the invention provides use of an
agent for promoting tissue regeneration, comprising admin-
istering an effective amount of an agent, wherein said agent is
selected from a sodium ionophore, or insulin, or both, and
wherein the agent induces Na+ influx into said cells, thereby
promoting tissue regeneration.
[0009] In certain embodiments of any of the foregoing, said
sodium ionophore is monensin. In related embodiments, said
Na+ influx does not alter the membrane potential of said cells.
In some embodiments, any of the foregoing method or use
promotes regeneration of an appendage or organ. In other
embodiments, any of the foregoing method or use promotes
regeneration of one or more of muscle tissue and neuronal
tissue.
[0010] In certain embodiments of any of the foregoing, the
cells comprise progenitor cells. In certain embodiments, the
cells are a culture of progenitor cells, such as a culture of
substantially purified progenitor cells. In some embodiments,
said progenitor cell is selected from one or more of an embry-
onic stem cell, a neural progenitor cell, a neural crest progeni-
tor cell, a mesenchymal stem cell, or a muscle progenitor cell.
[0011] In some embodiments of any of the foregoing, prior
to contact with said agent, the cell culture or external milieu
comprises a medium having a higher sodium concentration
relative to the intracellular sodium concentration of the cell.
In certain embodiments, prior to contact with said agent, the
cells are in a non-proliferative state.
[0012] In one embodiment of any of the foregoing, said
agent induces Na+ influx into said cells via an endogenously
expressed voltage-gated sodium channel.
[0013] In another aspect, the invention provides use of an
agent selected from one or more of an ionophore or a sodium
channel modulator that promote sodium efflux for inhibiting
growth and/or metastasis of tumor cells.

US 2012/0232000 A1
4
Sep. 13, 2012
the regeneration bud. (C) At 48 hpa, individual cells in the
new tissue express Na, 1.2. (D) A section through the regen-
eration bud showing that Na 1.2 is specifically expressed in
the mesenchymal cells but not in the wound epidermis. Red
arrows indicate expression; white arrows indicate lack of
expression. (E) V-ATPase (purple staining) is expressed at the
wound edge at 24 hours post injury. (F) In contrast, Na, 1.2 is
absent from the wound edge at the same timepoint. (G-I) A st.
40 animal injected at the 1-cell stage with Na 1.2 hairpin
RNAi construct that also expresses GFP. Yellow arrows indi-
cate the amputation plane. (G) Brightfield image of the tail
expressing RNAi construct immediately after amputation.
(H) Expression of GFP in the same tail as in panel G. (I)
Comparison of the effects of Na, 1.2 or dsRED RNAi in the
tail reveals specific inhibition of regeneration by loss of Na, 1.
2. In all figures, dorsal is up and anterior is to the left. Scale
bar-500 µm except for (D) bar=100 µm.

[0048] FIG. 2. Na 1.2 functions during the first 48 hours
post amputation. (A) Control tails amputated at st. 40 regen-
erate fully after 7 days, (B) while siblings treated with 250 µM
MS-222 failed to regenerate. Yellow arrows show the ampu-
tation plane. (C) Quantitative comparison of phenotypes from
2 different concentrations of MS-222 treatment as compared
to controls showing that the inhibition of regeneration is
dosage-dependent. (D) Histogram showing the inhibition of
regeneration (expressed as % of animals with poor or no
regenerate tissue for each treatment as compared to controls)
under different treatment regimes. Treatment with 250 μΜ
MS-222 demonstrated that about half of the inhibitory activ-
ity takes places during the first 24 hpa, and a 0-48 hpa expo-
sure is sufficient to exert maximal inhibition. Notably, expo-
sure initiated past 24 hpa is much less effective, revealing the
early requirement of Na 1.2 function during regeneration.
Scale bar-1 mm. * indicates p<0.05 as compared to 0-7 dpa
treatment.

[0049] FIG. 3. Inhibition of Na, 1.2 activity blocks Na+
transport and results in regenerative failure. (A-C) Signal
from CoroNa Green (green), a fluorescent indicator dye of
Na+ flux (red arrows). (A) In uncut tails, only scattered cells
exhibit CoroNa Green signal. (B) Under normal conditions,
Na influx into the regeneration bud (outlined by white
circles) is seen at 24 hpa. (C) Exposure to MS-222 blocks Na+
entry into the bud. A quantitative comparison of the signal
intensities between normal and MS-222-treated buds showed
that there is a 70% decrease in signal in Na, 1.2-inhibited buds
as compared to control buds (p<0.02; data not shown). (D)
Histogram (right panel) showing a significant reduction of the
number of H3P-positive cells at 48 hpa in regeneration buds
treated with MS-222 as compared to wild-type. In contrast,
the number of H3P-positive cells in the central tail region is
comparable to wild-type at 48 hpa (left panel), suggesting that
the proliferation defect is a regeneration-specific, spatially-
localized effect. Bars indicate standard deviation. (E-F)
Immunohistochemistry of 48 hpa tails identifying mitotic
cells using an anti-H3P antibody (blue signal, yellow arrows
in E and F). (E) Sagittal sections of an amputated control tail
show many mitotic cells in the bud. (F) Buds of tadpoles
exposed to MS-222 have few mitotic cells. (G-H) 72 hpa tails
stained with an antibody to acetylated a-tubulin to identify
axons. (G) In controls, axon bundles run parallel to the A-P
axis and concentrate at the tip of the regenerate (yellow
arrow). (H) In Na, 1.2-inhibited tails, axons are reduced in
numbers (white arrow) and trace along the edge of the ampu-
tation site. (A-F) Scale bar=500 µm. (G-H) Scale bar=50 µm.

[0050] FIG. 4. NaV acts downstream of V-ATPase to regu-
late expression of genes involved in regenerative outgrowth.
(A) Na 1.2 is expressed in the 24 hpa regeneration bud (red
arrow) of amputated tails. In contrast, Na, 1.2 protein is
absent in 24 hpa (B) and 48 hpa (C) tails stumps treated with
the V-ATPase inhibitor, Concanamycin (white arrow shows
absence of expression). (D) In 24 hpa tails cut during the
non-regenerative refractory stage, Na, 1.2 protein is also not
expressed. (E) Treatment of regeneration buds with the depo-
larizing reagent Palytoxin also abolishes Na, 1.2 expression,
suggesting that Na 1.2 expression is regulated by the mem-
brane potential state of the regenerate. (F-M) RNA in situ
hybridizations at 48 hpa of Notch and Msx1. Panels F, H, J,
and L are control tails whereas panels G, I, K, and M are tails
treated with MS-222 after amputation. (F) Notch RNA is
normally expressed in the neural ampulla (red arrow) and in
the mesenchyme of the regeneration bud but is greatly down-
regulated and mis-localized when Na, 1.2 activity is blocked
(black arrow) (G). (J) Msx1 is expressed in the amputation
edge and the neural ampulla (red arrow) of the regenerating
appendage. In the presence of MS-222, Msx1 RNA is absent
(black arrow) (K). (H, I, L, and M) are sagittal sections
through the regenerate. Scale bar=250 µm. (O-P) Comparison
of the relative voltage patterns of tail regeneration buds at 24
hpa using the voltage dye, DiBAC4(3). Green is more depo-
larized than blue. Distal tail end is outlined in white. Scale
bar=100 µm. (Ο) The regeneration bud (red circle) of controls
was polarized (blue color). (P) MS-222 treated buds show a
similar pattern. (Q) Quantitative comparison showing the
strong reduction in tail regenerative ability of animals treated
with the SIK inhibitor, Staurosporine, as compared to con-
trols (p<0.001, n=52).

[0051] FIG. 5. Short term induction of Nat current is suf-
ficient to induce regeneration. (A-B) Comparison of wound
epidermis at 18 hpa (red arrows bracketing WE). (A) Wound
healing in refractory buds results in a thickened epidermis by
18 hpa. (A') The width of epidermis is outlined by a dashed
red line, 2.5 pt. (B) This thick epidermis is not observed in
regeneration buds that are competent to fully restore the tail.
(B') The epidermis width outlined by a dashed red line, 1.25
pt. (C-G) Tails of refractory stage tadpoles were amputated.
At 18 hpa, tadpoles were treated with or without 90 mM Na+
and 20 µM monensin for 1 hour, and transferred back to
normal culture medium. Yellow arrows indicate the amputa-
tion plane. (C) A CoroNa Green analysis of refractory tails
showed that non-regenerative buds contain low level of intra-
cellular Na+ (green signal) at 19 hpa. (D) In contrast, tails
treated with monensin and high extracellular Na+ stimulated
Na+ transport into the bud resulting in a significantly stronger
CoroNa Green signal in the amputated tail. Images are shown
as a merge of the brightfield image and CoroNa Green fluo-
rescence of the same exposure time. (E) At 7 dpa, amputated
of the refractory period regenerate poorly. (F) A transient Na+
current was able to induce full regeneration. (G) In controls,
11% of tadpoles have poor regenerates while the majority
failed to regenerate. Stimulation of Na+ current with mon-
ensin specifically induced regeneration in 36% of the tad-
poles, representing a 3-fold increase over the control. Impor-
tantly, regeneration quality was greatly improved as 45% of
these tails show good to full regeneration. Scale bar=(A-B)
250 µm; (C-F) 500 µm.

[0052] FIG. 6. A model for integrating Na, 1.2 in caudal
regeneration. By 6 hpa, the H+ pump, V-ATPase is expressed
in the regeneration bud and is required to regulate the mem-

[0086] The intracellular sodium concentration may be
influenced through one or more of the methods as described
herein. In one example, an agent that opens a voltage-gated
sodium channel (e.g., a voltage-gated sodium channel
opener) may be used to promote influx of sodium. Such
agents are well known in the art and are also disclosed in US
Application No. 2008/0131920, incorporated herein by ref-
erence. In certain embodiments, the voltage-gated sodium
channel is a Na, 1.2 channel, a Na, 1.5 channel, or an ENaC
channel. However, any known voltage-gated sodium channel
may be used. In some embodiments, the voltage-gated
sodium channel is an endogenously expressed channel. Alter-
natively, the source of the voltage-gated sodium channel may
be exogenously expressed (e.g., via transfection or electropo-
ration). In a related embodiment, the exogenously expressed
voltage-gated sodium channel may be a variant or fragment of
the wild-type to confer different activity as compared to the
wild-type version. When a voltage-gated channel is endog-
enously or exogenously expressed, the invention contem-
plates increasing intracellular sodium concentration by
inducing sodium influx through the expressed voltage-gated
sodium channel.
[0087] In other embodiments, the intracellular sodium con-
centration may also be influenced through the use of sodium
ionophores or other agents that promote an increase in intra-
cellular sodium concentration in a channel-independent man-
ner. Ionophores as described herein include chemical iono-
phores (mobile ion carriers) or channel formers. Some
examples of Na+ ionophores include monensin and Gramici-
din A. In certain embodiments, insulin is used to influence the
intracellular sodium concentration. The invention contem-
plates the use of agents that increase intracellular sodium
concentration in a cell in a voltage-gated sodium channel-
dependent or -independent manner.
[0088] In addition to the use of agents to alter intracellular
sodium concentration, the method may further comprise
administering the agent in the presence of a medium having a
higher sodium concentration relative to the intracellular
sodium concentration in the cell (or in the cell of a tissue or
organ sample) prior to administration of one or more agents.
[0089] In certain embodiments, the cell (or cell of a tissue
or organ sample) is in a non-regenerative state prior to admin-
istration of the agent. In other embodiments, the cell is a
progenitor cell selected from one or more of an embryonic
stem cell, a neural progenitor cell, a neural crest progenitor
cell, a mesenchymal stem cell, or a muscle progenitor cell. In
certain in vitro contexts, the method may further comprise
administering one or more agents to a culture comprising the
progenitor cell. Thus, the present invention provides, in cer-
tain embodiments, methods for promoting proliferation and/
or differentiation of stem cells.
[0090] In some embodiments, the foregoing methods can
be applied to regenerate all or a portion of a tissue (e.g.,
muscle or neuronal tissue), or an organ (e.g., kidney or pan-
creas), or structural unit (e.g., an appendage or spinal cord).
[0091] Further, as exemplified herein, genetic knockdown
or pharmacological inhibition of Na, 1.2 both strongly abro-
gate regenerative ability in the absence of paralysis, general
malformations or toxicity, or effects on primary tail develop-
ment. Thus, as with a number of other transporters (Levin,
2006, 2007), it is possible to dissociate the housekeeping
functions of this ion channel from subtle patterning roles.
Notably, Na, 1.2 expression serves as a molecular marker
distinguishing true regeneration from wound healing (FIG.
1D-F) a distinction whose mechanistic details are often
debated in the field of regeneration biology. Thus, in addition
to the utility of the aspects and embodiments described
herein, for example, to modulate cell proliferation, to modu-
late tissue regeneration, and as tools to study the biology of
regeneration, an additional use of this technology is as a
marker to identify and distinguish regeneration from wound
healing. The development of such a marker is not only useful
in the basic research concept, but also as the basis of a diag-
nostic tool that could be used to select appropriate treatments
based on the state of an injury and the underlying tissue.
[0092] Accordingly, in another aspect, the invention pro-
vides a method for determining whether cells in a sample are
in a wound healing state or in a regenerative state, comprising
contacting said sample with a compound that detects expres-
sion of a Na 1.2 channel, wherein a sample in which cells
express the Na 1.2 channel are identified as being in a regen-
erative state. By way of example, the sample may comprise
the blastema of an amputated appendage, or any organ for
which regeneration is desired. In some embodiments, the
present method serves as a diagnostic tool to determine the
fate of a given in vitro sample of cells or tissue to establish a
therapeutic course. For example, using the present method, if
it is determined that a tissue sample is undergoing true regen-
eration (e.g., of an organ or an appendage) and not simple
wound healing, it would be a good candidate for transplant
into an organism.
[0093] In a related embodiment, a compound that detects
the Na, 1.2 channel may be one that detects the Na, 1.2 pro-
tein or Na, 1.2 mRNA. Some examples of such compounds
include, for example, antibodies or nucleic acid probes that
bind to the Na, 1.2 protein or hybridize to a nucleic acid
encoding the Na, 1.2 protein, respectively. Reagents and
methods for detection of protein or mRNA in a sample are
well known in the art, and are further exemplified herein.

[PAGE 19] B. Modulation of Intracellular Sodium Concentration to Pro-
mote Cell Proliferation and/or Tissue Regeneration in a Non-
Regenerative State
[0094] The Xenopus tadpole's refractory period provides a
convenient context within which to test treatments that may
overcome non-regenerative conditions in vertebrates. As
shown herein, Na, 1.2 is not expressed in the bud during the
refractory period (FIG. 4D). However, we showed that this
could be overcome (FIG. 5) by a 1-hour pharmacological
treatment that mimicked the transient NaV-dependent influx
of sodium in bud cells and restored regeneration. The ability
to restore regeneration using a rapid, highly controllable
approach not requiring gene therapy with heterologous trans-
porters or endogenous expression of such transporters is par-
ticularly valuable. Notable is the fact that induced regenerates
rapidly formed normal tails of the correct size. The ability to
induce a self-terminating and properly scaled growth pro-
gram (producing neither tumor-like growth, nor an extra-
large tail) suggests that sodium influx is a high-level target for
therapeutic modulation because it is able to initiate complex,
highly coordinated downstream morphogenetic programs in
the host that do not require external micromanagement of the
growth process. Also crucial is the fact that it was able to
restore regeneration at 18 hpa during the refractory stage,
long after a thick regeneration-incompetent wound epithe-
lium has formed, suggesting that the cells of the non-regen-
erative bud remain competent to initiate regeneration even
though they have been specified to not regenerate. This sug-
gests that scarring and other non-regenerative responses to
injury can be overcome and do not represent permanent
blocks to productive tissue regeneration. Thus, modulating
regenerative signals by increasing the intracellular sodium
concentration may promote regeneration, generally, as well
as in many non-regenerative conditions.
[0095] Accordingly, in some aspects, the invention pro-
vides a method of promoting tissue regeneration of a tissue in
a non-regenerative state, comprising administering an
amount of an agent effective to increase intracellular sodium
concentration in a cell in said tissue, wherein said agent
induces Na+ influx into said cell, thereby promoting cell
proliferation to promote tissue regeneration. In certain
embodiments, the method promotes innervation and/or vas-
cularization of the tissue.
[0096] In another aspect, the invention also provides a
method of promoting one or more of proliferation or differ-
entiation of a cell that is in a non-regenerative state, compris-
ing administering an amount of an agent effective to increase
intracellular sodium concentration in a cell, wherein said
agent induces Na+ influx into said cell, thereby promoting one
or more of proliferation and/or differentiation.
[0097] As used herein, it is understood that a cell in a
non-regenerative state refers to a cell or a population of cells
derived from organisms, such as mammals, whose endog-
enous regenerative capacity is not robust. Alternatively, non-
regenerative cells may be derived from endogenously non-
regenerating cells or cells derived from particular regions of
otherwise robustly regenerative organisms. By way of
example, a non-regenerative state includes a non-regenera-
tive wound epithelium or scar tissue.

[PAGE 20] C. Modulation of Intracellular Sodium Concentration to
Upregulate Genes that Promote Regeneration
[0101] As shown herein, inhibition of Na, 1.2 results in an
abrogation of regeneration-specific gene expression such as
MSX1 and Notch (FIG. 4F-M). Thus, Na, 1.2 drives regen-
erative growth endogenously, in part, by its regulation of
downstream signaling genes including Notch1 and Msx1.
These gene products appear to be important for building
appendages during regeneration in other systems such as the
tadpole limb, and zebrafish fin and heart regeneration (Poss et
al., 2000; Poss et al., 2002). Consistent with the conserved
roles of ion flows in regulating global patterning and morpho-
genetic cues (Levin, 2009; Nuccitelli et al., 1986), it is highly
likely that the early initiating mechanism of ion transporter
signaling in regeneration can also be utilized in other species.
[0102] Accordingly, in certain aspects, the invention pro-
vides a method of upregulating expression in a cell of one or
more genes that promote tissue regeneration, comprising
administering an amount of an agent effective to increase
intracellular sodium concentration in a cell, wherein said
agent induces Na+ influx into said cell, thereby upregulating
expression in said cell of one or more genes that promote
tissue regeneration. In certain embodiments, the method pro-
motes innervation of the tissue. In certain embodiments, the
method promotes vascularization of the tissue.

[PAGE 21] D. Modulation of Intracellular Sodium to Inhibit Cell Prolif-
eration and Migration
[0110] As exemplified above, certain aspects of the disclo-
sure provide numerous methods for increasing the intracel-
lular sodium concentration in a cell (or in cells in a tissue) to
promote proliferation, including proliferation leading to
regeneration and innervation. Such methods and reagents
have tremendous importance for the study of regeneration,
the understanding of the molecular distinctions between
regeneration and wound healing, and the development of
treatments and approaches to promote regeneration in mam-
mals as a therapeutic intervention for tissue loss due to dis-
ease, age, or injury.

[PAGE 12] B. RNAi
(Inoue et al., 1987, Nucl. Acids Res. 15:6131-6148), or a
chimeric RNA-DNA analogue (Inoue et al., 1987, FEBS Lett.
215:327-330).

[0131] Oligonucleotides to be used in the present invention
may be synthesized by standard methods known in the art,
e.g., by use of an automated DNA synthesizer (such as are
commercially available from Biosearch, Applied Biosys-
tems, etc.). As examples, phosphorothioate oligonucleotides
may be synthesized by the method of Stein et al. (1988, Nucl.
Acids Res. 16:3209), methylphosphonate oligonucleotides
can be prepared by use of controlled pore glass polymer
supports (Sarin et al., 1988, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.
85:7448-7451).

[0132] The antisense molecules can be delivered to cells or
animals in vitro or in vivo. A number of methods have been
developed for delivering antisense DNA or RNA to cells; e.g.,
antisense molecules can be injected directly into the tissue
site, or modified antisense molecules, designed to target the
desired cells (e.g., antisense linked to peptides or antibodies
that specifically bind receptors or antigens expressed on the
target cell surface) can be administered systemically. These
and other methods are have been used to deliver single anti-
sense oligonucleotides, as well as libraries of oligonucle-
otides.

[0133] Any type of plasmid, cosmid, YAC or viral vector
can be used to prepare the recombinant DNA construct that
can be introduced directly into the tissue site. Alternatively,
viral vectors can be used which selectively infect the desired
tissue, in which case administration may be accomplished by
another route (e.g., systematically).

[0134] Ribozyme molecules designed to catalytically
cleave an mRNA transcript can also be used to prevent trans-
lation of mRNA (See, e.g., PCT International Publication
WO90/11364, published Oct. 4, 1990; Sarver et al., 1990,
Science 247:1222-1225 and U.S. Pat. No. 5,093,246), and is
well known in the art. As in the antisense approach, the
ribozymes can be composed of modified oligonucleotides
(e.g., for improved stability, targeting, etc.) and can be deliv-
ered in vivo or in vitro. Alternatively, endogenous gene
expression can be reduced by targeting deoxyribonucleotide
sequences complementary to the regulatory region of the
gene (i.e., the promoter and/or enhancers) to form triple heli-
cal structures that prevent transcription of the gene in target
cells in the body. (See generally, Helene, C. 1991, Anticancer
Drug Des., 6(6):569-84; Helene, C., et al., 1992, Ann. N.Y.
Acad. Sci., 660:27-36; and Maher, L. J., 1992, Bioassays
14(12):807-15).

[0135] Antisense RNA and DNA, ribozyme, and triple
helix molecules to be used in the invention may be prepared
by any method known in the art for the synthesis of DNA and
RNA molecules. These include techniques for chemically
synthesizing oligodeoxyribonucleotides and oligoribonucle-
otides well known in the art such as for example solid phase
phosphoramidite chemical synthesis. Alternatively, RNA
molecules may be generated by in vitro and in vivo transcrip-
tion of DNA sequences encoding the antisense RNA mol-
ecule.

[0136] Moreover, various well-known modifications to
nucleic acid molecules may be introduced as a means of
increasing intracellular stability and half-life. Possible modi-
fications include but are not limited to the addition of flanking
sequences of ribonucleotides or deoxyribonucleotides to the
5' and/or 3' ends of the molecule or the use of phosphorothio-
ate or 2' O-methyl rather than phosphodiesterase linkages
within the oligodeoxyribonucleotide backbone.

[PAGE 12] B. RNAi
[0137] In other embodiments, the compound is an RNAi
construct. The present invention contemplates the use of
RNAi compounds to disrupt the expression of a voltage-gated
sodium channels, including a hyperactive voltage-gated
sodium channel, thereby inhibiting hyper-proliferating cells
such as those that occur in tumors. RNAi constructs comprise
double stranded RNA that can specifically block expression
of a target gene. "RNA interference" or "RNAi" is a term
initially applied to a phenomenon observed in plants and
worms where double-stranded RNA (dsRNA) blocks gene
expression in a specific and post-transcriptional manner.
Without being bound by theory, RNAi appears to involve
mRNA degradation, however the biochemical mechanisms
are currently an active area of research. RNAi provides a
useful method of inhibiting gene expression in vitro or in
vivo.

[0138] As used herein, the term "dsRNA" refers to siRNA
molecules, or other RNA molecules including a double
stranded feature and able to be processed to siRNA in cells,
such as hairpin RNA moieties, as specifically exemplified
herein.

[0139] As used herein, the term "RNAi construct" is a
generic term used throughout the specification to include
small interfering RNAs (siRNAs), hairpin RNAs, and other
RNA species which can be cleaved in vivo to form siRNAs.
RNAi constructs herein also include expression vectors (also
referred to as RNAi expression vectors) capable of giving rise
to transcripts which form dsRNAs or hairpin RNAs in cells,
and/or transcripts which can produce siRNAs in vivo.

[0140] Production of RNAi constructs to be used in the
present invention can be carried out by chemical synthetic
methods or by recombinant nucleic acid techniques known in
the art. Endogenous RNA polymerase of the treated cell may
mediate transcription in vivo, or cloned RNA polymerase can
be used for transcription in vitro. The RNAi constructs may
include modifications to either the phosphate-sugar backbone
or the nucleoside, e.g., to reduce susceptibility to cellular
nucleases, improve bioavailability, improve formulation
characteristics, and/or change other pharmacokinetic proper-
ties. The double-stranded structure may be formed by a single
self-complementary RNA strand or two complementary
RNA strands. RNA duplex formation may be initiated either
inside or outside the cell. The RNA may be introduced in an
amount which allows delivery of at least one copy per cell.
Higher doses (e.g., at least 5, 10, 100, 500 or 1000 copies per
cell) of double-stranded material may yield more effective
inhibition, while lower doses may also be useful for specific
applications. Inhibition is sequence-specific in that nucle-
otide sequences corresponding to the duplex region of the
RNA are targeted for genetic inhibition.

[0141] The siRNA molecules to be used in the present
invention can be obtained using a number of techniques
known to those of skill in the art. For example, the siRNA can
be chemically synthesized or recombinantly produced using
methods known in the art. For example, short sense and
antisense RNA oligomers can be synthesized and annealed to
form double-stranded RNA structures with 2-nucleotide
overhangs at each end (Caplen, et al. (2001) Proc Natl Acad
Sci USA, 98:9742-9747; Elbashir, et al. (2001) EMBO J,
20:6877-88). These double-stranded siRNA structures can
then be directly introduced to cells, either by passive uptake
or a delivery system of choice.

[PAGE 13] 
[0142] In certain embodiments, the RNAi construct is in the
form of a hairpin structure (named as hairpin RNA). The
hairpin RNAs can be synthesized exogenously or can be
formed by transcribing from RNA polymerase III promoters
in vivo. Examples of making and using such hairpin RNAs for
gene silencing in mammalian cells are described in, for
example, Paddison et al., Genes Dev, 2002, 16:948-58;
McCaffrey et al., Nature, 2002, 418:38-9; McManus et al.,
RNA, 2002, 8:842-50; Yu et al., Proc Natl Acad Sci USA,
2002, 99:6047-52). It is known in the art that siRNAs can be
produced by processing a hairpin RNA in the cell.

[0143] In yet other embodiments, a plasmid is used to
deliver the double-stranded RNA, e.g., as a transcriptional
product. In such embodiments, the plasmid is designed to
include a "coding sequence" for each of the sense and anti-
sense strands of the RNAi construct. The coding sequences
can be the same sequence, e.g., flanked by inverted promot-
ers, or can be two separate sequences each under transcrip-
tional control of separate promoters. After the coding
sequence is transcribed, the complementary RNA transcripts
base-pair to form the double-stranded RNA.

[0144] Exemplary RNAi constructs that specifically recog-
nize a particular gene, or a particular family of genes can be
selected using methodology outlined in detail above with
respect to the selection of antisense oligonucleotide. Simi-
larly, methods of delivering RNAi constructs include the
methods for delivering antisense oligonucleotides outlined in
detail above, and as exemplified herein.

[PAGE 13] V. Cells and Animals
[0145] As outlined throughout in reference to particular
methods of the invention, the subject methods can be con-
ducted in vitro, in vivo, or ex vivo in cells, tissue, or organs
derived from or resident in virtually any organism.

[0146] The foregoing methods can be conducted in cells in
culture, in tissue samples maintained ex vivo, or in animals.
When the method is conducted using cells in culture, the
invention contemplates using cells derived from any organ-
ism, tissue, or stage of development. Furthermore, the inven-
tion contemplates that the cells may be primary cultures of
cells, or transformed cell lines, and that the cells can either be
wild type cells or cells containing one or more mutations.
Mutant cells or cell lines may be models of a particular
disease or injury, or may be derived from animals having a
specific disease or injury (e.g., cancer cells harvested from an
animal).

[0147] Cells may be derived from (e.g., derived from and
cultured in vitro as populations of cells or tissues) or reside in
(cells resident in a whole animal or portion of a whole animal)
any of a number of animal species. Exemplary animals
include, but are not limited to, flatworms, amphibians, fish,
reptiles, birds, or mammals. Suitable flatworms include pla-
narian. Suitable amphibians include Xenopus laevis, Xenopus
tropicalis, and other species of frog. Suitable birds include
chickens, as well as other birds commonly used or maintained
in a laboratory setting. Suitable mammals include mice, rats,
hamsters, goats, sheep, pigs, cows, dogs, cats, rabbits, non-
human primates, and humans.

[0148] Regardless of the species of cells or animal selected,
the invention contemplates that cells may be derived from or
reside in an animal of virtually any stage of development. For
example, the cells may be derived from or reside in an embry-
onic, larval, fetal, juvenile, or adult organism.

[0149] To further illustrate, in one embodiment, the fore-
going methods may be conducted using cells derived from or
resident in a nematode. There are over 10,000 known nema-
tode species. These include parasitic nematodes (e.g., nema-
todes that are parasitic to humans, non-human animals, or
plants). Exemplary parasitic nematodes include, but are not
limited to, whipworms, Ascaris, hookworms, filarial worms,
and root knot nematodes. C. elegans is perhaps the most well
known and thoroughly studied nematode, and the invention
contemplates using C. elegans or other nematodes.

[0150] In another embodiment, the foregoing methods may
be conducted in cells derived from or resident in a fish or
amphibian species. Zebrafish (e.g., adult zebrafish and devel-
oping, e.g., embryonic fish) are a particular example of a fish
well suited for study. Zebrafish are an extensively used devel-
opmental system, and genetic, cell biological, and molecular
biological reagents and methods are well known and avail-
able. Additionally, numerous chemical and radiation-based
screens have produced large numbers of mutant zebrafish that
can also be used for study.

[0151] Xenopus laevis and Xenopus tropicalis (e.g., adult,
embryonic, tadpole, etc. stage animals) are particular
examples of amphibians well suited for study. Both species
are used extensively, and well developed reagents exist. For
example, the availability of these molecular reagents facili-
tates assays based on changes in gene or protein expression,
either instead of or in addition to assays based on morpho-
logical criteria. Additionally, Xenopus tropicalis is a geneti-
cally tractable model organism, and mutants have been and
continue to be generated and characterized. Xenopus cells and
whole organisms are excellent systems for screening assays.
The cells of early Xenopus embryos are relatively large, and
thus easily manipulated, injected, and used for electrophysi-
ological recording. Eggs and embryos can be collected in
very large numbers. This facilitates biochemical, pharmaco-
logical, and statistical analyses.

[0152] In another embodiment, the foregoing methods may
be conducted in cells derived from or resident in a flatworm.
Exemplary flatworms are the free-living (e.g., non-parasitic)
flatworm planaria. Planaria are in the phylum Platylhelmen-
thes and the class Turbellaria. There are numerous species of
planaria, any of which can be readily used. Planaria exhibit
much of the complexity of vertebrate systems: a well-differ-
entiated nervous system, intestine, eyes, brain, three tissue
layers, and bilateral symmetry. Planaria represent a critical
breakthrough in the evolution of the animal body plan and are
thought to very closely resemble the proto-bilaterian ances-
tor. It is the first organism to have both bilateral symmetry and
encephalization, making it capable of detecting environmen-
tal stimuli quicker and more efficiently than the lower meta-
zoans. Despite a simplistic appearance and evolutionary posi-
tion, planaria possess a well-developed nervous system with
true synaptic transmission and have what can be considered
the first animal "brain" (Sarnat and Netsky (1985) Can J
Neurol Sci. 12(4): 296-302). They have also developed sen-
sory capabilities for the detection of light (Brown and Park
(1975) Int J. Chronobiol. 3(1):57-62; Brown et al., 1968),
chemical gradients (Mason (1975) Anim Behav. May; 23(2):
460-9; Miyamoto and Shimozawa (1985) Zoological Science
(Tokyo) 2: 389-396), vibration (Fulgheri and Messeri (1973)
Boll Soc Ital Biol Sper. 49(20): 1141-5), electric fields
(Brown and Ogden (1968) J Gen Physiol. 51 (2) 255-60), mag-
netic fields (Brown and Chow (1975) Physiological Zoology
48: 168-176; Brown (1966) Nature 209: 533-5), and weak
y-radiation (Brown and Park (1964) Nature 202: 469-471).


[PAGE 14] 
[0153] Planaria have exceptional regenerative capacity. A
bisected flatworm readily regenerates. Thus, planaria, either
whole animals or fragments, serve as an excellent model
system in which to study the implications of ion flux on cell
proliferation, differentiation, innervation, and migration. In
addition to planaria, other model systems have enhanced
regenerative capacity, and these systems are especially well
suited for studies of ion flux on regeneration. By way of
example, fish and amphibian species may be especially useful
as model systems in such studies.

[0154] The invention contemplates the use of animals,
including any of the foregoing animals and cells derived
therefrom.

[0155] Regardless of the particular organism selected, and
regardless of whether the subject methods are conducted in
vitro or in vivo, cells, tissue, organs, or animals may be of any
developmental stage including, but not limited to, embryonic,
fetal, larval, tadpole, juvenile, and adult stage cells or organ-
isms. One of skill in the art can select the proper animal and
developmental stage depending on the application of the sub-
ject method. Furthermore, one of skill in the art can select the
appropriate animal and developmental stage based on the
research interests of the investigator, time, and cost consid-
erations, as well as the availability of other complementary
research reagents. Additionally, even when whole organisms
or large fragments of whole organisms are used, one of skill in
the art may choose to examine a particular biological process
in only a portion of the whole organism or fragment.

[0156] In one embodiment, the animal, tissue, or organ
(including whole animals, injured animal, fragments, or cell
derived therefrom) is selected based on its robust regenerative
ability. Cells, tissues, organs, or animals with an enhanced
regenerative ability may be useful in methods for identifying
and characterizing a role for ion transporter proteins, ion flux,
membrane potential, and/or pH in dedifferentiation and
regeneration. Exemplary animals and systems with enhanced
regenerative capacity include, but are not limited to, planaria,
the zebrafish tail, the amphibian (e.g., Xenopus) tail, and the
amphibian limb. An understanding of how regeneration is
modulated in any of these systems can be used to increase/
stimulate regenerative capacity in organisms and systems
whose endogenous regenerative capacity is less robust. In
another embodiment, the animal or tissue is selected for
screening and study specifically because its endogenous
regenerative capacity is not robust. Such systems include any
cells, tissues, or organs derived from organisms, such as
mammals, whose endogenous regenerative capacity is not
robust. Such systems also include endogenously non-regen-
erating cells or tissues derived from particular regions of
otherwise robustly regenerative organisms.

[0157] In one embodiment, the animal/organism is a pro-
tochordate. Protochordates possess a hollow dorsal nerve
cord, gill slits, and a notochord. Exemplary protochordates
include tunicata (e.g., sea squirts, etc.) and cephalochordate
(e.g., amphioxus). Exemplary amphioxus include, but are not
limited to Ciona intestinalis and Branchiostoma floridae
(Holland and Gibson-Brown (2003) BioEssays 25: 528-532;
Gostling and Shimeld (2003) Evolution and Development 5:
136; Dehal et al. (2002) Science 298: 2157-2167; Nishiyama
et al. (1972) Tohoku J Exp Med 107: 95-96; Ogasawara et al.
(2002) Develop Genes Evol 212: 173-185; Pope and Rowley
(2002) J Exp Biology 205: 1577-1583).

[0158] In another embodiment, the animal/organism is a
hemichordate. Exemplary hemichordates include acorn
worms (Tagawa et al. (2001) Evol and Develop 3: 443).

[0159] In another embodiment, the animal/organism is a
nematode. There are over 10,000 known nematode species.
These include parasitic nematodes (e.g., nematodes that are
parasitic to humans, non-human animals, or plants). Exem-
plary parasitic nematodes include, but are not limited to,
whipworms, Ascaris, hookworms, filarial worms, and root
knot nematodes.

[0160] C. elegans is perhaps the most well known and thor-
oughly studied nematode, and the invention contemplates
using C. elegans or other nematodes. Although C. elegans is
considered a soil nematode, methods for culturing C. elegans
in various quantities of liquid media (e.g., in a fluid) are well
developed. See, http://elegans.swmed.edu/. Accordingly, the
methods and apparatuses of the invention for conducting
assays in aquatic animals can be readily used to conduct
assays in C. elegans.

[0161] In another embodiment, the animal is a fish or
amphibian. Exemplary amphibians include frog (e.g., species
of Xenopus) and salamanders (e.g., species of Axolotls).

[0162] In another embodiment, the animal is a flatworm.
Exemplary flatworms are the free-living (e.g., non-parasitic)
flatworm planaria. Planaria are in the phylum Platylhelmen-
thes and the class Turbellaria. There are numerous species of
planaria, any of which can be readily used.

[0163] In another embodiment, the organism is a mammal
such as a mouse, rat, rabbit, pig, cow, dog, cat, non-human
primate, or human.

[0164] The invention contemplates the use of any of the
foregoing animals. Each of these has numerous characteris-
tics that make them suitable for particular assays or for par-
ticular methods of promoting/inhibiting proliferation, differ-
entiation, and/or migration. The appropriate model organism
can be readily selected based on the particular assays being
conducted, as well as space and resource constraints. Further-
more, the appropriate developmental stage can be readily
selected. Exemplary developmental stages include, but are
not limited to, embryonic stages, fetal stages, tadpole stages,
larval stages, juvenile stages, and adult stages. In certain
embodiments, the animal is chosen due to its optical acces-
sibility. Furthermore, the invention contemplates studying
whole animals, animal fragments, or animals inflicted with an
injury. An exemplary animal fragment is a bisected or tri-
sected organism. In one embodiment, the animal fragment is
a bisected or trisected planarian. Additionally, the invention
contemplates the use of wild type or mutant animals. In one
embodiment, the animal is a wild type embryonic, tadpole,
larval, fetal, juvenile, or adult stage animal. In another
embodiment, the animal is a mutant embryonic, tadpole, lar-
val, fetal, juvenile, or adult stage animal.

[0165] In certain embodiments, it may be desirable to con-
duct an assay, for example an assay to identify and/or char-
acterize a compound that modulates a particular developmen-
tal or regenerative process, in a relatively simple system.
Identified compounds or candidate ion transporter proteins
can later be analyzed in higher organisms including mice,
rats, non-human primates, and humans.

[0166] In certain other embodiments, it may be desirable to
conduct an assay in parallel using different populations of
cells. For example, screening assays can be conducted in
parallel using cells derived from or resident in different
organisms. Alternatively, screening assays can be conducted
in parallel using cells of varying developmental stages
derived from or resident in the same organism. In still another
embodiment, screening assays can be conducted in parallel
using cells of different developmental lineages (e.g., different
cell or tissue types) derived from or resident in the same
model organism. In this embodiment, the cells of differing
developmental lineages can be of the same or varying devel-
opmental stages.

[0167] In certain embodiments, the cells are stem cells.
Exemplary stem cells include embryonic stem cells, adult
stem cells, and tumor stem cells. Such stem cells can be from
any tissue, organism or stage of development.

[0168] Depending on the particular model system and bio-
logical process chosen (e.g., organism, cell type, develop-
mental stage, etc) for study or manipulation, one of skill in the
art can select the appropriate culture conditions and methods
for monitoring changes in the model system. For example,
certain phenotype changes can be observed and monitored
based on visual inspection with either the aided or unaided
eye. Other phenotypic changes can be observed using
molecular, cell biological, or biophysical reagents available
in the art. For example, changes in the expression of one or
more molecular markers can be assessed using known tech-
niques including, but not limited to, RT-PCR, in situ hybrid-
ization, Northern blot analysis, Western blot analysis, immu-
nocytochemistry, immunohistochemistry, and GeneChip
analysis. Further tools including, but not limited to, method of
detecting changes in cell proliferation, cell death, cell sur-
vival, membrane potential, intracellular pH, ion flux and the
like can also be used to detect and assess phenotypic changes
in cells or organisms.

[PAGE 15] VI. Exemplary Disease and Injuries
[0169] Compounds, and pharmaceutical preparations
thereof, that modulate intracellular sodium concentration in
cells to induce proliferation, differentiation, innervation, and/
or migration of cells may be useful in the treatment of injury
requiring regeneration or degenerative disease. Such com-
pounds can be administered to a human or non-human patient
in need of augmenting a regenerative response to disease or
injury. Briefly, compounds that promote regeneration may be
administered to promote the combination of proliferation,
differentiation, innervation, and/or migration of cells needed
to regenerate damaged, diseased, or injured tissue.

[0170] The invention contemplates the use of compounds
individually or in combination. Suitable combinations
include combinations of multiple compounds identified as
promoting proliferation, differentiation, and/or migration of
cells by modulating intracellular sodium concentration. Suit-
able combinations also include a compound that promotes
proliferation, differentiation, and/or migration by modulating
intracellular sodium concentration along with one or more
agents conventionally used in the treatment of the particular
injury or degenerative disease.

[0171] Multiple agents may act additively or synergisti-
cally, and include combinations of agents that may show little
or no effect when administered alone. Furthermore, the
invention contemplates the use of agents in combination with
known factors that influence proliferation, differentiation,
innervation, migration, or survival of a particular cell type.
Still further, the invention contemplates the use of agents as
part of a therapeutic regimen along with other surgical, radio-
logical, chemical, homeopathic, or pharmacologic interven-
tion appropriate for the particular cell type, disease or condi-
tion.

[0172] Agents which possess one of more of these charac-
teristics may be useful in a therapeutic context. For example,
injuries and diseases of the central and peripheral nervous
system effect a tremendous number of people and exact a
large financial and person toll. Injuries include traumatic
injuries (i.e., breaks, blunt injury, burns, lacerations) to the
brain or spinal cord, as well as other injuries to any region of
the CNS or PNS including, but not limited to, injuries caused
by bacterial infection, viral infection, cell damage following
surgery, exposure to a toxic agent, cellular damage caused by
cancer or other proliferative disorder, ischemia, hypoxia, and
the like. Currently, effective treatments for injuries of the
CNS and PNS are limited, and individuals often experience
long-term deficits consistent with the extent of injury, the
location of the injury, and the types of cell that are effected.

[0173] In addition to injuries of the CNS and PNS, there are
a wide variety of neurodegenerative diseases that effect par-
ticular regions and/or cell types of the CNS or PNS. These
diseases are often progressive in nature, and individuals
afflicted with many of these diseases have few treatment
options at there disposal. Exemplary neurodegenerative dis-
eases include, but are not limited to, Parkinson's disease,
Huntington's disease, Alzheimer's disease, ALS, multiple
sclerosis, stroke, macular degeneration, peripheral neuropa-
thy, and diabetic neuropathy.

[0174] In certain embodiments, compounds can be admin-
istered to promote regeneration of mesodermal or endoder-
mal cell and tissue types. Injuries and diseases of tissues
derived from the mesoderm or endoderm include, but are not
limited to, myocardial infarction, osteoarthritis, rheumatoid
arthritis, diabetes, cirrohsis, polycystic kidney disease,
inflammatory bowel disease, pancreatitis, Crohn's disease,
cancer of any mesodermal or endodermal tissue (e.g, pancre-
atic cancer, Wilms tumor, soft cell carcinoma, bone cancer,
breast cancer, prostate cancer, ovarian cancer, uterine cancer,
liver cancer, colon cancer, etc), and injuries to any mesoder-
mal or endodermal tissue including breaks, tears, bruises,
lacerations, burns, toxicity, bacterial infection, and viral
infection.

[0175] Furthermore, agents identified by the methods of the
present invention may be used to modulate cells of the blood
and blood vessels. Exemplary agents can be used to modulate
(promote or inhibit) angiogenesis. Inhibition of angiogenesis
is of particular use in the treatment of many forms of cancers,
as well as in conditions aggravated by excess angiogenesis
such as macular degeneration. Promotion of angiogenesis is
of particular use in the treatment of conditions caused or
aggravated by decreased blood flow. Exemplary conditions
include, but are not limited to, myocardial infarction, stroke,
and ischemia. Additionally, agents identified by the methods
of the present invention can be used to promote proliferation
and differentiation of various cell types of the blood and can
be used in the treatment of anemia, leukemia, and various
immunodeficiencies.

[0176] For any of the foregoing, the application contem-
plates that agents may be administered alone, or may be
administered in combination with other agents. Further, the
application contemplates that agents identified according to
the subject methods can be administered as part of a thera-
peutic regimen along with other treatments appropriate for
the particular injury or disease being treated. For example, in

[PAGE 16] 
the case of Parkinson's disease, a subject agent may be
administered in combination with L-dopa or other Parkin-
son's disease medications, or in combination with a cell based
neuronal transplantation therapy for Parkinson's disease. In
the case of an injury to the brain or spinal cord, a subject agent
may be administered in combination with physical therapy,
hydrotherapy, massage therapy, and the like. In the case of
peripheral neuropathy, as for example diabetic neuropathy, a
subject agent may be administered in combination with insu-
lin. In the case of myocardial infarction, the subject agent may
be administered along with angioplasty, surgery, blood pres-
sure medication, and/or as part of an exercise and diet regi-
men.

[0177] Physical injuries may result in cellular damage that
ultimately limits the function of a particular cell or tissue. For
example, physical injuries to cells in the CNS may limit the
function of cells in the brain, spinal cord, or eye. Examples of
physical injuries include, but are not limited to, crushing or
severing of neuronal tissue, such as may occur following a
fall, car accident, gun shot or stabbing wound, etc. Further
examples of physical injuries include those caused by
extremes in temperature such as burning, freezing, or expo-
sure to rapid and large temperature shifts.

[0178] Physical injuries to mesodermal cell types include
injuries to skeletal muscle, cardiac muscle, tendon, ligament,
cartilage, bone, and the like. Examples of physical injuries
include, but are not limited to, crushing, severing, breaking,
bruising, and tearing of muscle tissue, bone or cartilage such
as may occur following a fall, car accident, gun shot or stab-
bing wound, etc. Further examples of physical injuries
include breaking, tearing, or bruising of muscle tissue, bone,
cartilage, ligament, or tendon as may occur following a sports
injury or due to aging. Further examples of physical injuries
include those caused by extremes in temperature such as
burning, freezing, or exposure to rapid and large temperature
shifts.

[0179] Physical injuries to endodermal cell types include
injuries to hepatocytes and pancreatic cell types. Examples of
physical injuries include, but are not limited to, crushing,
severing, and bruising, such as may occur following a fall, car
accident, gun shot or stabbing wound, etc. Further examples
of physical injuries include those caused by extremes in tem-
perature such as burning, freezing, or exposure to rapid and
large temperature shifts.

[0180] Further examples of an injury to any of the afore-
mentioned cell types include those caused by infection such
as by a bacterial or viral infection. Examples of bacterial or
viral infections include, but are not limited to, meningitis,
staph, HIV, hepatitis A, hepatitis B, hepatitis C, syphilis,
human papilloma virus, strep, etc. However, one of skill in the
art will recognize that many different types of bacteria or
viruses may infect cells and cause injury.

[0181] The methods of the present invention may be
applied to regenerate all or a portion of a tissue or organ. That
is, in addition to the types of tissue (muscle tissue, neural
tissue, skin, bone, cartilage, ligament, or tendon) that may be
regenerated according to the present invention, the invention
may be applied to regenerate all or a portion of an organ or a
structure. Some examples of organs and structures include,
but are not limited to, the following: liver, pancreas, kidney,
heart, spinal cord, limbs, and digits.

[0182] Additionally, injury to a particular cell type may
occur as a consequence or side effect of other treatments
being used to relieve some condition in an individual. For
example, cancer treatments (chemotherapy, radiation
therapy, surgery) may cause significant damage to both can-
cerous and healthy cells. Surgery; implantation of intralumi-
nal devices; the placement of implants, pacemakers, shunts;
and the like can all result in cellular damage.

[0183] A wide range of neurodegenerative diseases cause
extensive cell damage (i.e., injury) to cells of the CNS and
PNS. Accordingly, neurodegenerative diseases are candi-
dates for treatment using the described agents. Administra-
tion of a subject agent can promote neuronal regeneration in
the CNS or PNS of a patient with a neurodegenerative dis-
ease, and the promotion of neuronal regeneration can ame-
liorate, at least in part, symptoms of the disease. Agents may
be administered individually, in combination with other
agents of the invention, or as part of a treatment regimen
appropriate for the specific condition being treated. The fol-
lowing are illustrative examples of neurodegenerative condi-
tions which can be treated using the subject agents.

[0184] Parkinson's disease is the result of the destruction of
dopamine-producing neurons of the substantia nigra, and
results in the degeneration of axons in the caudate nucleus and

US 2012/0232000 A1
16
Sep. 13, 2012
the case of Parkinson's disease, a subject agent may be
administered in combination with L-dopa or other Parkin-
son's disease medications, or in combination with a cell based
neuronal transplantation therapy for Parkinson's disease. In
the case of an injury to the brain or spinal cord, a subject agent
may be administered in combination with physical therapy,
hydrotherapy, massage therapy, and the like. In the case of
peripheral neuropathy, as for example diabetic neuropathy, a
subject agent may be administered in combination with insu-
lin. In the case of myocardial infarction, the subject agent may
be administered along with angioplasty, surgery, blood pres-
sure medication, and/or as part of an exercise and diet regi-
men.

[0177] Physical injuries may result in cellular damage that
ultimately limits the function of a particular cell or tissue. For
example, physical injuries to cells in the CNS may limit the
function of cells in the brain, spinal cord, or eye. Examples of
physical injuries include, but are not limited to, crushing or
severing of neuronal tissue, such as may occur following a
fall, car accident, gun shot or stabbing wound, etc. Further
examples of physical injuries include those caused by
extremes in temperature such as burning, freezing, or expo-
sure to rapid and large temperature shifts.

[0178] Physical injuries to mesodermal cell types include
injuries to skeletal muscle, cardiac muscle, tendon, ligament,
cartilage, bone, and the like. Examples of physical injuries
include, but are not limited to, crushing, severing, breaking,
bruising, and tearing of muscle tissue, bone or cartilage such
as may occur following a fall, car accident, gun shot or stab-
bing wound, etc. Further examples of physical injuries
include breaking, tearing, or bruising of muscle tissue, bone,
cartilage, ligament, or tendon as may occur following a sports
injury or due to aging. Further examples of physical injuries
include those caused by extremes in temperature such as
burning, freezing, or exposure to rapid and large temperature
shifts.

[0179] Physical injuries to endodermal cell types include
injuries to hepatocytes and pancreatic cell types. Examples of
physical injuries include, but are not limited to, crushing,
severing, and bruising, such as may occur following a fall, car
accident, gun shot or stabbing wound, etc. Further examples
of physical injuries include those caused by extremes in tem-
perature such as burning, freezing, or exposure to rapid and
large temperature shifts.

[0180] Further examples of an injury to any of the afore-
mentioned cell types include those caused by infection such
as by a bacterial or viral infection. Examples of bacterial or
viral infections include, but are not limited to, meningitis,
staph, HIV, hepatitis A, hepatitis B, hepatitis C, syphilis,
human papilloma virus, strep, etc. However, one of skill in the
art will recognize that many different types of bacteria or
viruses may infect cells and cause injury.

[0181] The methods of the present invention may be
applied to regenerate all or a portion of a tissue or organ. That
is, in addition to the types of tissue (muscle tissue, neural
tissue, skin, bone, cartilage, ligament, or tendon) that may be
regenerated according to the present invention, the invention
may be applied to regenerate all or a portion of an organ or a
structure. Some examples of organs and structures include,
but are not limited to, the following: liver, pancreas, kidney,
heart, spinal cord, limbs, and digits.

[0182] Additionally, injury to a particular cell type may
occur as a consequence or side effect of other treatments
being used to relieve some condition in an individual. For
example, cancer treatments (chemotherapy, radiation
therapy, surgery) may cause significant damage to both can-
cerous and healthy cells. Surgery; implantation of intralumi-
nal devices; the placement of implants, pacemakers, shunts;
and the like can all result in cellular damage.

[0183] A wide range of neurodegenerative diseases cause
extensive cell damage (i.e., injury) to cells of the CNS and
PNS. Accordingly, neurodegenerative diseases are candi-
dates for treatment using the described agents. Administra-
tion of a subject agent can promote neuronal regeneration in
the CNS or PNS of a patient with a neurodegenerative dis-
ease, and the promotion of neuronal regeneration can ame-
liorate, at least in part, symptoms of the disease. Agents may
be administered individually, in combination with other
agents of the invention, or as part of a treatment regimen
appropriate for the specific condition being treated. The fol-
lowing are illustrative examples of neurodegenerative condi-
tions which can be treated using the subject agents.

[0184] Parkinson's disease is the result of the destruction of
dopamine-producing neurons of the substantia nigra, and
results in the degeneration of axons in the caudate nucleus and
the putamen degenerate. Although therapies such as L-dopa
exist to try to ameliorate the symptoms of Parkinson's dis-
ease, to date we are unaware of treatments which either pre-
vent the degeneration of axons and/or increase neuronal
regeneration. Administration of agents with promote neu-
ronal regeneration can help to ameliorate at least certain
symptoms of Parkinson's disease including rigidity, tremor,
bradykinesia, poor balance and walking problems.

[0185] Alzheimer's disease, a debilitating disease charac-
terized by amyloid plaques and neurofibrillary tangles,
results in a loss of nerve cells in areas of the brain that are vital
to memory and other mental abilities. There also are lower
levels of chemicals in the brain that carry complex messages
back and forth between nerve cells. Alzheimer's disease dis-
rupts normal thinking and memory. The incidence of Alzhe-
imer's disease will only increase as the average life expect-
ancy continues to rise around the world. One of the most
notable features of Alzheimer's disease is that affected indi-
viduals can live for extended periods of time (ten or more
years) while being in an extremely debilitated state often
requiring round the clock care. Accordingly, the disease takes
not only an enormous emotional toll, but also exacts a tre-
mendous financial toll on affected individuals and their fami-
lies. Therapies which improve neuronal function have sub-
stantial utility in improving the quality of life of Alzheimer's
sufferers.

[0186] Huntington's disease is a degenerative disease
whose symptoms are caused by the loss of cells in a part of the
brain called the basal ganglia. This cell damage affects cog-
nitive ability (thinking, judgment, memory), movement, and
emotional control. Symptoms appear gradually, usually in
midlife, between the ages of 30 and 50. However, the disease
can also strike young children and the elderly. Huntington's
disease is a genetic disorder. Although people diagnosed with
the disease can often maintain their independence for several
years following diagnosis, the disease is degenerative and
eventually fatal. Currently, there are no treatments available
to either cure or to ameliorate the symptoms of this disease.
Furthermore, the onset of Huntington's disease is typically in
middle-age (approx age 40), at a time when many people have
already had children. Thus, people have usually passed this
fatal genetic disorder to their off-spring before they realize
that they are ill.

[0187] Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), often referred
to as "Lou Gehrig's disease," is a progressive neurodegenera-
tive disease that attacks motor nerve cells in the brain and the
spinal cord. Degeneration of motor neurons affect the ability
of the brain to initiate and control muscle movement. With all
voluntary muscle action affected, patients in the later stages
of the disease become totally paralyzed, and eventually die.

[0188] Multiple sclerosis (MS) is an illness diagnosed in
over 350,000 persons in the United States today. MS is char-
acterized by the appearance of more than one (multiple) areas
of inflammation and scarring of the myelin in the brain and
spinal cord. Thus, a person with MS experiences varying
degrees of neurological impairment depending on the loca-
tion and extent of the scarring. The most common character-
istics of MS include fatigue, weakness, spasticity, balance
problems, bladder and bowel problems, numbness, vision
loss, tremor and vertigo. The specific symptoms, as well as
the severity of these symptoms, varies from patient to patient
and is largely determined by the particular location within the
brain of the lesions.

[0189] MS is considered an autoimmune disease. Recent
data suggest that common viruses may play a role in the onset
of MS. If so, MS may be caused by a persistent viral infection
or alternatively, by an immune process initiated by a transient
viral infection in the central nervous system or elsewhere in
the body. Epidemiological studies indicating the distribution
of MS patients suggest that there is a triggering factor respon-
sible for initiating onset of the disease. Without being bound
by theory, it appears that some environmental factor, most
likely infectious, must be encountered.

[0190] The incidence of MS is higher in North America and
Europe and this geographic distribution is further suggestive
of an environmental influence(s) underlying onset of MS.
Additionally, MS is more prevalent in women than in men,
and is more common amongst Caucasians than within either
Hispanic or African-American populations. Interestingly,
MS is extremely rare within Asian populations.

[0191] Macular degeneration is a catch-all term for a num-
ber of different disorders that have a common end result: the
light-sensing cells of the central region of the retina-the
macula-malfunction and eventually die, with gradual
decline and loss of central vision, while peripheral vision is
retained. Most cases of macular degeneration are isolated,
individual, occurrences, mostly in people over age 60. These
types are called Age Related Macular Degeneration (AMD).
More rarely however, younger people, including infants and
young children, develop macular degeneration, and they do
so in clusters within families. These types of macular degen-
eration are collectively called Juvenile Macular Degeneration
and include Stargardt's disease, Best's vitelliform macular
dystrophy, Doyne's honeycomb retinal dystrophy, Sorsby's
fundus dystrophy, Malattia levintinese, Fundus flavimacula-
tus, and Autosomal dominant hemorrhagic macular dystro-
phy.

[0192] The present invention makes available effective
therapeutic agents for restoring cartilage function to a con-
nective tissue. Such methods are useful in, for example, the
repair of defects or lesions in cartilage tissue which is the
result of degenerative wear such as that which results in
arthritis, as well as other mechanical derangements which
may be caused by trauma to the tissue, such as a displacement
of torn meniscus tissue, meniscectomy, a laxation of a joint by
a torn ligament, misalignment of joints, bone fracture, or by
hereditary disease. The present reparative method is also use-
ful for remodeling cartilage matrix, such as in plastic or
reconstructive surgery, as well as periodontal surgery. The
present method may also be applied to improving a previous
reparative procedure, for example, following surgical repair
of a meniscus, ligament, or cartilage. Furthermore, it may
prevent the onset or exacerbation of degenerative disease if
applied early enough after trauma.

[0193] Such connective tissues as articular cartilage, inter-
articular cartilage (menisci), costal cartilage (connecting the
true ribs and the sternum), ligaments, and tendons are par-
ticularly amenable to treatment. As used herein, regenerative
therapies include treatment of degenerative states which have
progressed to the point of which impairment of the tissue is
obviously manifest, as well as preventive treatments of tissue
where degeneration is in its earliest stages or imminent. The
subject method can further be used to prevent the spread of
mineralisation into fibrotic tissue by maintaining a constant
production of new cartilage.

[0194] In an illustrative embodiment, the subject method
can be used to treat cartilage of a diarthroidal joint, such as a
knee, an ankle, an elbow, a hip, a wrist, a knuckle of either a
finger or toe, or a temperomandibular joint. The treatment can
be directed to the meniscus of the joint, to the articular carti-
lage of the joint, or both. To further illustrate, the subject
method can be used to treat a degenerative disorder of a knee,
such as which might be the result of traumatic injury (e.g., a
sports injury or excessive wear) or osteoarthritis.

[0195] In still further embodiments, agents of the present
invention can be employed for the generation of bone (osteo-
genesis) at a site in the animal where such skeletal tissue is
deficient. For instance, administration of an agent that pro-
motes the differentiation of stem cells to bone can be
employed as part of a method for treating bone loss in a
subject, e.g. to prevent and/or reverse osteoporosis and other
osteopenic disorders, as well as to regulate bone growth and
maturation. For example, preparations comprising the iden-
tified agents can be employed, for example, to induce endo-
chondral ossification.

[0196] Therapeutic compositions can be supplemented, if
required, with other osteoinductive factors, such as bone
growth factors (e.g. TGF-ẞ factors, such as the bone morpho-
genetic factors BMP-2 and BMP-4, as well as activin), and
may also include, or be administered in combination with, an
inhibitor of bone resorption such as estrogen, bisphospho-
nate, sodium fluoride, calcitonin, or tamoxifen, or related
compounds.

[0197] In still further embodiments, the disclosure provides
methods and reagents for inhibiting proliferation or migration
of hyper-proliferative cells. Such methods and reagents can
be used in the treatment of virtually any type of cancer.
Exemplary cancers include, but are not limited to: solid
tumors (such as tumors of the liver, kidney, lung, breast,
stomach, colon, ovary, testes, bladder, or pancreas), blood
cancers (such as leukemias and lymphomas), and diffuse
tumors (such as melanomas and certain brain tumors). The
methods and reagents described herein can be used alone or in
combination with one or more additional cancer treatments
appropriate for the particular hyper-proliferative disorder.
Exemplary other treatments include, but are not limited to,
chemotherapeutic agents, immunomodulating agents, radia-
tion therapy, surgery, acupuncture, massage, hormone
therapy, pain management, exercise, and dietary therapy.


[PAGE 18] VII. Models of Regeneration

[0198] Proliferation and regeneration can be studied in
vitro using primary or transformed cells in culture, as well as
using fresh tissue samples obtained from human or animal
patients. Any of the foregoing provide a model to evaluate the
effect of increasing intracellular sodium concentration on the
proliferation and regeneration characteristics of these cells.
Cell lines or primary samples can be obtain from virtually any
tissue type, and thus a wide variety of tissue samples can be
evaluated to see: (i) whether they endogenously express a
voltage-gated sodium channel and (ii) what the pre-treatment
intracellular sodium concentration is, and (iii) what the pre-
treatment membrane potential is. This not only provides
extensive understanding about how best to manipulate differ-
ent types of cells, but may also provide a diagnostic criteria
for evaluating when and how to manipulate intracellular
sodium concentration to provide an efficacious effect. Addi-
tionally, these models provide an opportunity to evaluate
dosage and timing parameters (e.g., what is the range of safe
and effective doses; how long should tissue be treated).

[0199] In addition, proliferation and regeneration can be
evaluated using a model system with a high innate level of
regeneration potential, such as amphibians, zebrafish, and
planarian. Of particular interest are studies designed to pro-
mote regeneration in these animals during a refractory period
where the natural regeneration potential is very well. Promot-
ing regeneration during the refractory period models promot-
ing regeneration in an animal that does not have a naturally
high level of regenerative potential.

[0200] Further, experiments can be performed in mamma-
lian systems (e.g., systems in which the natural regenerative
potential is limited). For example, the ear punch assay can be
used. In this assay a hole is punched through the ear cartilage
of a rodent. Methods and reagents can be evaluated based on
their ability to promote regeneration of that tissue (e.g., pro-
mote regeneration of the complex cartilage and skin tissue
rather than just promote scab formation or skin closure). An
additional example is the peripheral nerve transection model.
Briefly, the sciatic nerve of a rodent (typically a rat or mouse)
is transected. Methods and reagents can be evaluated based on
their ability to restore all or partial function to the animal
following transection.

[0201] A related animal model focuses on the spinal cord.
An animal spinal cord can be cut (the sharp method) or
compressed (the blunt method) to mimic various types of
spinal cord injuries. The sharp method mimics an injury in
which the spinal cord is actually partially or completed sev-
ered at a position. The blunt methods mimics an injury in
which the spinal cord is compressed and considerable dam-
age ensues due to swelling and bruising around the cord.
Either model can be used to evaluate methods and reagents
based on their ability to restore all or partial function to the
animal following spinal cord injury.

[0202] Another animal model focuses on the digits. Small
pieces of a rodent's tail and/or digits are amputated. The
methods and reagents of the invention would be used and
evaluated for their ability to promote regeneration of the
amputated tail and digit tissue.

[0203] The foregoing is merely exemplary of some of the
models that can be used.

[0204] Following extensive animal studies to ensure safety
and efficacy, the methods and reagents are ultimately be
tested on human patients.

[0205] The foregoing models are also useful for determin-
ing the optimal route of administration for a particular con-
dition. For example, for determining whether an agent should
be administered systemically, injected locally, perfused
locally around the target tissue, and the like.


[PAGE 18] VIII. Models of Cancer

[0206] Hyper-proliferative cells can be studied in vitro
using transformed cell lines, cell lines made directly from
patient tumor tissue, or using fresh samples of human or
animal patient tissue. Any of the foregoing provide a model to
evaluate the effect of decreasing intracellular sodium concen-
tration on the growth and migration characteristics of these
cells. Cell lines or primary samples can be obtained for vir-
tually any tumor type, and thus a wide variety of cancer
samples can be evaluated to see: (i) whether they endog-
enously express a voltage-gated sodium channel and (ii) what
the pre-treatment intracellular sodium concentration is, and
(iii) what the pre-treatment membrane potential is. This not
only provides extensive understanding about which types of
hyperproliferative cells are most likely to respond to a
decrease in intracellular sodium concentration, but may also
provide a diagnostic criteria for evaluating when decreasing
intracellular sodium will likely be efficacious. Additionally,
these models provide an opportunity to evaluate dosage and
timing parameters (e.g., what is the range of safe and effective
doses; how long should tissue be treated).

[0207] In addition to experiments conducted in cells and
tissue samples in culture, numerous in vivo models exist. One
model is referred to as the xenograft model whereby cancer-
ous or pre-cancerous cells grown in culture are transplanted
into an animal host. The animal host is then treated to treat the
tumor. Such a model could easily be used here. Such a model
would also allow one to evaluate whether the agent needs to
be administered very locally (e.g., injected into the tumor or
perfused around and through the tumor) or whether it can be
administered systemically. Finally, animal models for spe-
cific types of cancers can be used in much the same way as
described above for the xenograft model. Any in vivo animal
model would allow an evaluation of the tolerability and effi-
cacy of the treatment, particularly whether both tumor growth
and migration are effected equally or whether the treatment
has a more pronounced effect on one over the other.

[0208] Furthermore, we note that studies conducted across
a range of different types of hyper-proliferative conditions
(e.g., various solid tumors, blood cancers, etc.) will allow for
rational selection of treatments based on the likelihood the
treatment will be effective for that hyper-proliferative condi-
tion.

[0209] The foregoing is merely exemplary of the cell and
animal models that can be used to further evaluate the efficacy
of the compounds and methods of the invention.

[0210] The foregoing models are also useful for determin-
ing the optimal route of administration for a particular con-
dition. For example, for determining whether an agent should
be administered systemically, injected locally, perfused
locally around the target tissue, and the like.


[PAGE 19] IX. Administration

[0211] For any of the foregoing classes of compounds that
can be used in the various methods of the present invention,
one of skill in the art can select amongst available delivery
methods to administer the compound to the particular cells,
tissue, or organs in vitro, in vivo, or ex vivo. The term "admin-
istering" is used to refer to providing a compound to cells,
tissues, organs, or structures in vitro, in vivo, or ex vivo. By
way of example, many compounds readily transit epidermal
barriers and other biological membranes. To administer such
compounds to cells or to an animal, the compound can simply
be dissolved and added to the fluid in which the cells or animal
is cultured. Alternatively, the compound can be dissolved and
added to the animals food or drinking water. In another alter-
native, the compound can be administered to the animal via
local or systemic injection.

[0212] Certain compounds do not as readily transit epider-
mal barriers and biological membranes, and thus additional
techniques have been adapted to administer such compounds
to cells, tissues, and organisms. For example, RNAi con-
structs are often administered to animals by addition to their
food or drinking water. Numerous types of nucleic acids are
delivered via viral or plasmid-based expression vectors.
Polypeptide-based compounds that do not readily transit
membrane or that are not actively transported into cells via
receptor-mediated mechanisms can be administered along
with carriers that facilitate transit into cells and tissues. The
foregoing exemplary administration methods are well known
in the art and can be selected based on the compounds and
organisms being employed in the particular methods of use.

[0213] Whether compounds are being administered as part
of an assay or as part of a method for modulating cell behav-
ior, compounds can be administered alone or as pharmaceu-
tical formulations. Exemplary pharmaceutical compositions
are formulated for administration to cells or animals. In cer-
tain embodiments, the compound included in the pharmaceu-
tical preparation may be active itself, or may be a prodrug,
e.g., capable of being converted to an active compound in a
physiological setting. In certain embodiments the subject
compounds may be simply dissolved or suspended in water,
for example, in sterile water. In certain embodiments, the
pharmaceutical preparation is non-pyrogenic, i.e., does not
elevate the body temperature of an animal.

[0214] The phrase "pharmaceutically acceptable carrier"
as used herein means a pharmaceutically acceptable material,
composition or vehicle, such as a liquid or solid filler, diluent,
excipient, solvent or encapsulating material, involved in car-
rying or transporting a subject compound. Each carrier must
be "acceptable" in the sense of being compatible with the
other ingredients of the formulation and not injurious to the
patient. Some examples of materials which can serve as phar-
maceutically acceptable carriers include: (1) sugars, such as
lactose, glucose and sucrose; (2) starches, such as corn starch
and potato starch; (3) cellulose, and its derivatives, such as
sodium carboxymethyl cellulose, ethyl cellulose and cellu-
lose acetate; (4) powdered tragacanth; (5) malt; (6) gelatin;
(7) talc; (8) excipients, such as cocoa butter and suppository
waxes; (9) oils, such as peanut oil, cottonseed oil, safflower
oil, sesame oil, olive oil, corn oil and soybean oil; (10) gly-
cols, such as propylene glycol; (11) polyols, such as glycerin,
sorbitol, mannitol and polyethylene glycol; (12) esters, such
as ethyl oleate and ethyl laurate; (13) agar; (14) buffering
agents, such as magnesium hydroxide and aluminum hydrox-
ide; (15) alginic acid; (16) pyrogen-free water; (17) isotonic
saline; (18) Ringer's solution; (19) ethyl alcohol; (20) phos-
phate buffer solutions; and (21) other non-toxic compatible
substances employed in pharmaceutical formulations.

[0215] In certain embodiments the agents may contain a
basic functional group, such as amino or alkylamino, and are,
thus, capable of forming pharmaceutically acceptable salts
with pharmaceutically acceptable acids. The term "pharma-
ceutically acceptable salts" in this respect, refers to the rela-
tively non-toxic, inorganic and organic acid addition salts of
compounds of the present invention. These salts can be pre-
pared in situ during the final isolation and purification of the
compounds of the invention, or by separately reacting a puri-
fied compound of the invention in its free base form with a
suitable organic or inorganic acid, and isolating the salt thus
formed. Representative salts include the hydrobromide,
hydrochloride, sulfate, bisulfate, phosphate, nitrate, acetate,
valerate, oleate, palmitate, stearate, laurate, benzoate, lactate,
phosphate, tosylate, citrate, maleate, fumarate, succinate, tar-
trate, naphthylate, mesylate, glucoheptonate, lactobionate,
and laurylsulphonate salts and the like. (See, for example,
Berge et al. (1977) "Pharmaceutical Salts", J. Pharm. Sci.
66:1-19)

[0216] The pharmaceutically acceptable salts of the subject
compounds include the conventional nontoxic salts or qua-
ternary ammonium salts of the compounds, e.g., from non-
toxic organic or inorganic acids. For example, such conven-
tional nontoxic salts include those derived from inorganic
acids such as hydrochloride, hydrobromic, sulfuric, sulfamic,
phosphoric, nitric, and the like; and the salts prepared from
organic acids such as acetic, propionic, succinic, glycolic,
stearic, lactic, malic, tartaric, citric, ascorbic, palmitic,
maleic, hydroxymaleic, phenylacetic, glutamic, benzoic,
salicyclic, sulfanilic, 2-acetoxybenzoic, fumaric, toluene-
sulfonic, methanesulfonic, ethane disulfonic, oxalic,
isothionic, and the like.

[0217] In other cases, the compounds of the present inven-
tion may contain one or more acidic functional groups and,
thus, are capable of forming pharmaceutically acceptable
salts with pharmaceutically acceptable bases. The term
"pharmaceutically acceptable salts" in these instances refers
to the relatively non-toxic, inorganic and organic base addi-
tion salts of compounds of the present invention. These salts
can likewise be prepared in situ during the final isolation and
purification of the compounds, or by separately reacting the
purified compound in its free acid form with a suitable base,
such as the hydroxide, carbonate or bicarbonate of a pharma-
ceutically acceptable metal cation, with ammonia, or with a
pharmaceutically acceptable organic primary, secondary or
tertiary amine. Representative alkali or alkaline earth salts
include the lithium, sodium, potassium, calcium, magnesium,
and aluminum salts and the like. Representative organic
amines useful for the formation of base addition salts include
ethylamine, diethylamine, ethylenediamine, ethanolamine,
diethanolamine, piperazine and the like. (See, for example,
Berge et al., supra)

[0218] Wetting agents, emulsifiers and lubricants, such as
sodium lauryl sulfate and magnesium stearate, as well as
coloring agents, release agents, coating agents, sweetening,
flavoring and perfuming agents, preservatives and antioxi-
dants can also be present in the compositions.

[0219] Examples of pharmaceutically acceptable antioxi-
dants include: (1) water soluble antioxidants, such as ascorbic
acid, cysteine hydrochloride, sodium bisulfate, sodium met-
abisulfite, sodium sulfite and the like; (2) oil-soluble antioxi-
dants, such as ascorbyl palmitate, butylated hydroxyanisole
(BHA), butylated hydroxytoluene (BHT), lecithin, propyl
gallate, alpha-tocopherol, and the like; and (3) metal chelat-
ing agents, such as citric acid, ethylenediamine tetraacetic
acid (EDTA), sorbitol, tartaric acid, phosphoric acid, and the
like.

[0220] Another aspect of the present invention provides
pharmaceutically acceptable compositions comprising an
effective amount of one or more of the compounds described
herein, formulated together with one or more pharmaceuti-
cally acceptable carriers (additives) and/or diluents. The
pharmaceutical compositions of the present invention may be
specially formulated for administration in solid or liquid
form, including, but not limited to, those adapted for the
following: (1) oral administration, for example, drenches
(aqueous or non-aqueous solutions or suspensions), tablets,
boluses, powders, granules, pastes for application to the
tongue; (2) parenteral administration, for example, by subcu-
taneous, intramuscular or intravenous injection as, for
example, a sterile solution or suspension; (3) topical applica-
tion, for example, as a cream, ointment or spray applied to the
skin; wound dressing applied directly to a site of injury or
wound; or (4) intravaginally or intrarectally, for example, as a
pessary, cream or foam; or (5) opthalamic administration, for
example, for administration following injury or damage to the
retina; (6) administration to the spinal cord to promote regen-
eration of the structure, in part or whole, via a continuous
infusion that bathes the spinal cord; (7) by local injection or
perfusion of the target tissue; or (8) administration to a sev-
ered digit or limb via a sleeve containing the composition.
However, in certain embodiments the subject compounds
may be simply dissolved or suspended in sterile water. In
certain embodiments, the pharmaceutical preparation is non-
pyrogenic, i.e., does not elevate the body temperature of a
human or animal patient.


[PAGE 20] EXEMPLIFICATION

[0221] The invention now being generally described, it will
be more readily understood by reference to the following
examples, which are included merely for purposes of illus-
tration of certain aspects and embodiments of the present
invention, and are not intended to limit the invention. For
example, the particular experimental design disclosed herein
represent exemplary tools and methods for validating proper
function. As such, it will be readily apparent that any of the
disclosed specific experimental plan can be substituted within
the scope of the present disclosure.


[PAGE 20] Example 1
Na 1.2 is Specifically Expressed During Early
Regeneration But Not Wound Healing

[0222] Voltage-gated sodium channels (VGSCs) are
plasma membrane proteins that regulate sodium influx into
cells (Yu and Catterall, 2003), and two are known in Xenopus:
Na 1.2 and Na, 1.5. To assess whether these voltage-gated
sodium channels might play a role during tail regeneration,
we examined their expression in the regeneration bud. While
Na 1.5 is not expressed (data not shown), Na, 1.2 protein
becomes expressed by 18 hpa (FIGS. 1A and 1B) and persists
until 2 days post amputation (dpa) (FIG. 1C). This expression
pattern is consistent with a role for Na 1.2 in tail regenera-
tion.

[0223] Interestingly, Na, 1.2 protein was detected only in
the mesenchymal cells of the regeneration bud (FIG. 1D, red
arrow), unlike V-ATPase, a key ion transporter for regenera-
tion which is also expressed in the wound epithelium (Adams
et al., 2007). To determine whether Na, 1.2 may also function
in wound healing, we examined its expression in flank
wounds at 24 hours. In contrast to V-ATPase, which is up-
regulated in such wounds (FIG. 1E), Na, 1.2 protein was not
detected at the wound edge (FIG. 1F). Thus, Na 1.2 is a
unique molecular marker that specifically distinguishes true
regeneration (a process that restores the complex caudal
structure after amputation) from simple wound healing.


[PAGE 20] Example 2
Pharmacological Inhibition of Na, 1.2 Activity Pre-
vents Tail Regeneration in Xenopus Larvae

[0224] To determine if Na, 1.2 activity is required for tail
regeneration, we ablated its function molecularly by RNA
interference (RNAi) using a plasmid encoding a short RNA
hairpin construct specifically targeting the Xenopus Na, 1.2
gene. The targeting vector carries a GFP marker (Miskevich
et al., 2006), enabling the selection of animals that expressed
the construct in the distal tail (FIGS. 1G and 1H). Expression
of the Na, 1.2 short RNAi hairpin in the tail region at the site
of amputation (yellow arrows) efficiently inhibited tail regen-
eration (Regeneration Index=RI, see "Tail Regeneration
Assay" in Methods; RI=198, n=100, versus RI=261, n=72 for
control RNAi targeting dsRED, a fluorescent protein that is
not endogenous to Xenopus, p<0.01), demonstrating that
Na 1.2 is specifically required for tail regeneration (FIG.
1H).

[0225] To characterize the temporal requirement of Na, 1.2
function during regeneration, we looked to utilize pharmaco-
logical inhibitors of Na 1.2 that will enable us to vary the
timing of the functional blockade. First, we determined
whether chemical inhibition of Na, 1.2 activity recapitulates
its loss-of-function phenotype during regeneration. MS-222
(also known as tricaine) is a well-known inhibitor of VGSCs
(Hedrick and Winmill, 2003) that blocks inward Na+ currents
(Frazier and Narahashi, 1975). Treatment of animals with
MS-222 immediately after tail amputation significantly
inhibited regenerative ability (RI=62, n=100) (FIG. 2B) when
compared to controls (RI=265, n=97, p<0.01) (FIG. 2A), and
in a dose-dependent manner (FIG. 2C). The treatment did not
induce significant apoptosis in the bud (data not shown).
Importantly, the µM concentrations used for the tail assays
were approximately ten-fold lower than what is usually used
for amphibian anesthesia (generally in the mM range). Simi-
lar to the Na 1.2

[PAGE 20] EXEMPLIFICATION
The invention now being generally described, it will
be more readily understood by reference to the following
examples, which are included merely for purposes of illus-
tration of certain aspects and embodiments of the present
invention, and are not intended to limit the invention. For
example, the particular experimental design disclosed herein
represent exemplary tools and methods for validating proper
function. As such, it will be readily apparent that any of the
disclosed specific experimental plan can be substituted within
the scope of the present disclosure.

[PAGE 20] Example 1
Na 1.2 is Specifically Expressed During Early
Regeneration But Not Wound Healing
Voltage-gated sodium channels (VGSCs) are
plasma membrane proteins that regulate sodium influx into
cells (Yu and Catterall, 2003), and two are known in Xenopus:
Na 1.2 and Na, 1.5. To assess whether these voltage-gated
sodium channels might play a role during tail regeneration,
we examined their expression in the regeneration bud. While
Na 1.5 is not expressed (data not shown), Na, 1.2 protein
becomes expressed by 18 hpa (FIGS. 1A and 1B) and persists
until 2 days post amputation (dpa) (FIG. 1C). This expression
pattern is consistent with a role for Na 1.2 in tail regenera-
tion.
Interestingly, Na, 1.2 protein was detected only in
the mesenchymal cells of the regeneration bud (FIG. 1D, red
arrow), unlike V-ATPase, a key ion transporter for regenera-
tion which is also expressed in the wound epithelium (Adams
et al., 2007). To determine whether Na, 1.2 may also function
in wound healing, we examined its expression in flank
wounds at 24 hours. In contrast to V-ATPase, which is up-
regulated in such wounds (FIG. 1E), Na, 1.2 protein was not
detected at the wound edge (FIG. 1F). Thus, Na 1.2 is a
unique molecular marker that specifically distinguishes true
regeneration (a process that restores the complex caudal
structure after amputation) from simple wound healing.

[PAGE 20] Example 2
Pharmacological Inhibition of Na, 1.2 Activity Pre-
vents Tail Regeneration in Xenopus Larvae
To determine if Na, 1.2 activity is required for tail
regeneration, we ablated its function molecularly by RNA
interference (RNAi) using a plasmid encoding a short RNA
hairpin construct specifically targeting the Xenopus Na, 1.2
gene. The targeting vector carries a GFP marker (Miskevich
et al., 2006), enabling the selection of animals that expressed
the construct in the distal tail (FIGS. 1G and 1H). Expression
of the Na, 1.2 short RNAi hairpin in the tail region at the site
of amputation (yellow arrows) efficiently inhibited tail regen-
eration (Regeneration Index=RI, see "Tail Regeneration
Assay" in Methods; RI=198, n=100, versus RI=261, n=72 for
control RNAi targeting dsRED, a fluorescent protein that is
not endogenous to Xenopus, p<0.01), demonstrating that
Na 1.2 is specifically required for tail regeneration (FIG.
1H).
To characterize the temporal requirement of Na, 1.2
function during regeneration, we looked to utilize pharmaco-
logical inhibitors of Na 1.2 that will enable us to vary the
timing of the functional blockade. First, we determined
whether chemical inhibition of Na, 1.2 activity recapitulates
its loss-of-function phenotype during regeneration. MS-222
(also known as tricaine) is a well-known inhibitor of VGSCs
(Hedrick and Winmill, 2003) that blocks inward Na+ currents
(Frazier and Narahashi, 1975). Treatment of animals with
MS-222 immediately after tail amputation significantly
inhibited regenerative ability (RI=62, n=100) (FIG. 2B) when
compared to controls (RI=265, n=97, p<0.01) (FIG. 2A), and
in a dose-dependent manner (FIG. 2C). The treatment did not
induce significant apoptosis in the bud (data not shown).
Importantly, the µM concentrations used for the tail assays
were approximately ten-fold lower than what is usually used
for amphibian anesthesia (generally in the mM range). Simi-
lar to the Na 1.2 RNAi experiment, the overall development
and movement of the animals were normal during pharmaco-
logical treatment, and had no effect on primary tail formation
during early embryogenesis. We conclude that Na, 1.2 func-
tion is specifically required for regeneration, and that both
pharmacological and molecular loss-of-function to selec-
tively reveal the importance of Na, 1.2.

[PAGE 21] Example 3
Na 1.2 Activity is Required During Regeneration
To examine the temporal requirement for Na 1.2
function during this process, we amputated tails of tadpoles,
treated them with MS-222 for specific durations, and assayed
their regenerative ability. Treatment with MS-222 through the
entire length (7 days) of the assay was sufficient to inhibit
regeneration in 82% of the tails (FIG. 2D); likely this effect is
stronger than that of the RNAi due to the mosaicism observed
with DNA injections (FIG. 1H). Blocking Na, 1.2 activity for
the first 24 hours post amputation prevented tail regeneration
in 45% of the tadpoles, indicating that Na-1.2 plays a role in
bud establishment. When the duration of MS-222 treatment
was expanded to include the first 48 hpa, 78% of the tails
failed to regenerate, fully recapitulating the severity of phe-
notype seen when Na, 1.2 function was inhibited throughout
the full 7 days required for normal regeneration. However,
addition of MS-222 to block Na, 1.2 activity at 48 hpa, after
regenerative outgrowth has begun, had no effect on inhibiting
regeneration. These results strongly suggest that Na 1.2
function is principally required during the establishment and
early outgrowth phases of regeneration.

[PAGE 21] Example 4
Inhibition of Na, 1.2 Activity Abolishes Sodium Flux
During Regeneration
Na1.2 is a membrane-bound Na+ transporter that
regulates the influx of Na+ into cells (Yu and Catterall, 2003).
Thus, we examined the functional consequences of Na+ trans-
port in regeneration using MS-222. To visualize Na+ flux, we
used CoroNa Green, a fluorescent Na+ indicator dye that
selectively interacts with Na+ ions and exhibits an increase in
fluorescent emission upon binding (Meier et al., 2006). In
intact tails, a few randomly distributed cells appear positive
for the CoroNa Green signal relative to the majority of the tail
population (FIG. 3A). At 24 hpa, a specific CoroNa Green
signal is strong in the regeneration bud region but not in the
rest of the tail and trunk (FIG. 3B), suggesting a significant
increase in Na+ transport into the cells of the bud during
normal regeneration. This observation correlates with Na, 1.2
being specifically up-regulated in the bud after amputation.
When the amputated tails were treated with the Na, inhibitor,
MS-222, the CoroNa Green signal was abolished (FIG. 3C,
p<0.02), confirming that inhibition of Na, 1.2 function abro-
gates Na+ influx into the bud. Given that MS-222 inhibits
regeneration, the observed control of Na+ content by Na, 1.2
indicates that this channel functions in regeneration princi-
pally through its modulation of Na+ flux into bud cells.

[PAGE 21] Example 5
Inhibition of Na, 1.2 Function Reduces Proliferation
and Alters Axonal Migration
To understand the cellular basis for regenerative
failure in animals with loss of Na, 1.2 function, we examined
proliferation in MS-222-treated amputated tails. During
development, mitotic cells are observed to be randomly
located in the growing tail. In normal regeneration, an
increased number of proliferating cells are concentrated at the
regeneration bud by 48 hpa (Adams et al., 2007). We quanti-
fied the number and distribution of proliferating cells in
regenerating tails at 48 hpa using an antibody to phosphory-
lated Histone 3B (H3P), a marker of the G2/M transition of the
cell cycle that identifies mitotic cells in Xenopus and many
other systems (Adams et al., 2007; Saka and Smith, 2001).
Inhibition of Na, 1.2 function by MS-222 resulted in a 90%
decrease in the number of mitotic cells in the regeneration bud
region (1.3±1.5, n=4) as compared to control siblings (12.
5±4.8, n=4, p<0.005) (FIG. 3D). Many H3P-positive cells are
seen in the wild-type regeneration bud (FIG. 3E) but very few
are detected in MS-222 treated buds (FIG. 3F). In contrast, no
significant change in proliferation was seen in the central tail
"flank" region (71±27 H3P-positive cells for control as com-
pared to 66.3±10 H3P-positive cells for MS-222 treatment,
n=8, p=0.38) (FIG. 3D'), suggesting that Na 1.2 activity is
not a general requirement for normal cell division. Together,
these data demonstrate that Na 1.2 is necessary for the spe-
cific up-regulation of proliferation in the regenerative growth
region during endogenous tail regeneration.
It has long been known that regenerative growth
requires proper innervation (Singer, 1952, 1965). Thus, we
asked whether Na, 1.2 regulates neural regeneration by exam-
ining the neuronal pattern in the amputated tail of tadpoles
treated with MS-222. In normal 3-day old tail regenerates,
axons appear in bundles that grow and concentrate to the end
of the regenerate, in a direction parallel to the anterior-poste-
rior axis (FIG. 3G). In contrast, chemical inhibition of Na, 1.2
caused axons to extend circumferentially along the edge of
the regeneration bud, perpendicular to the main axis of tail
growth (FIG. 3H). Notably, the overall quantity of neurons
appeared to be reduced as compared to its control siblings.
These results suggest that Na, 1.2 is required for proper inner-
vation of the regenerate.


[PAGE 22] Example 6
Na 1.2 Expression is Regulated by Membrane
Potential
In order to better understand the role of Na, 1.2, we
examined its potential relationships with known regenerative
pathways. First, we investigated the pathways potentially
regulating Na, 1.2 expression. Inhibition of Na, 1.2 in ampu-
tated tails did not alter V-ATPase expression in the 24 hpa
regeneration bud (data not shown). However, in amputated
tails treated with Concanamycin, a specific inhibitor of V-AT-
Pase activity (Huss et al., 2002) that blocks regeneration
(Adams et al., 2007), the expression of Na, 1.2 protein was
absent at 24 and 48 hpa (FIGS. 4A-4C). Thus, our results
indicate that Na 1.2 function is dependent upon V-ATPase
function but not vice versa. We next examined Na, 1.2 protein
expression during the refractory stages, an endogenous
period during development in which tadpoles temporarily
lose the ability of caudal regeneration (Beck et al., 2003).
Na 1.2 protein was not detected in 24-hour tail stumps ampu-
tated during this non-regenerative state (FIG. 4D). Thus, the
presence or absence of Na, 1.2 is predictive of regenerative
ability, consistent with the above-demonstrated functional
roles.
Since V-ATPase controls the cell membrane voltage
potential in the regeneration bud (Adams et al., 2007), the
endogenous up-regulation of Na, 1.2 at 18 hpa could be attrib-
uted to either H'-pump-mediated changes in the transmem-
brane potential of bud cells, or to other unknown functions of
the V-ATPase protein complex. To distinguish between these
possibilities, we used palytoxin, which converts ubiquitous
Na+-potassium transporters into non-specific pores (Tosteson
et al., 2003) to depolarize regeneration bud cells while main-
taining normal V-ATPase activity. Exposure of amputated
tails to 2 nM palytoxin significantly reduced regeneration
without affecting overall development, growth, or V-ATPase
expression (Adams et al., 2007). In the presence of palytoxin,
Na, 1.2 protein was not detected in the regeneration bud at 24
hpa (FIG. 4E), suggesting that the endogenous induction of
Na 1.2 expression by V-ATPase function occurs through the
H+ pump's control of transmembrane potential of regenera-
tion bud cells.

[PAGE 22] Example 7
Inhibition of Na, 1.2 Function Reduces Expression
of Downstream Genes that Drive Regenerative Out-
growth
Several pathways have been shown to be required
for driving regenerative outgrowth and patterning in the tail,
including Notch, Msx1, and BMP (Beck et al., 2006; Beck et
al., 2003; Sugiura et al., 2004). RNA expression of Notch,
Msx1, and BMP components can be observed after 24 hpa in
the regenerating tail tissues. We performed in situ hybridiza-
tion using gene-specific RNA probes to examine the expres-
sion patterns of Notch and Msx1 in the regeneration bud after
treatment with MS-222. In wild-type regeneration buds at 48
hpa, Notch1 is normally expressed in the neural ampulla and
in the mesenchymal region of the regeneration bud (FIGS. 4F
and 4H). In contrast, Na, 1.2-inhibited tail buds exhibited
greatly reduced levels of Notch1 that was mislocalized to the
tip (FIGS. 4G and 41). At 48 hpa, Msx1 was expressed in the
neural ampulla and at the epithelial edge of the regenerating
tail tip (FIGS. 4J and 4L). When Na activity was blocked,
Msx1 expression was abolished (FIGS. 4K and 4M). Like-
wise, levels of BMP2, BMP4, and Delta were greatly reduced
in the presence of MS-222 (data not shown). These results
demonstrate that Na 1.2 acts upstream to regulate the expres-
sion of several key genes that are known to control caudal
regenerative outgrowth and patterning.

[PAGE 22] Example 8
Na 1.2 Controls Regeneration Through Modulation
of Intracellular Na+ Levels, not V
mem
To gain a detailed mechanistic understanding of
Na 1.2 activity, we examined the consequences of modulat-
ing Na+ ion transport in the regenerating tail. During devel-
opment, the intact tail is hyper-polarized with a few depolar-
ized cells that are randomly distributed (Adams et al., 2007).
However, after tail amputation, the presumptive regeneration
bud becomes highly depolarized. V-ATPase is active by 6 hpa
and its function is required to re-polarize the bud by 24 hpa. If
the bud is polarized at this timepoint, then regeneration pro-
ceeds normally; if the bud remains depolarized (as when
V-ATPase is inactivated, either during the refractory period or
by Concanamycin), then regeneration fails. Because VGSC
activity is also a well-known major determinant of a cell's
membrane potential level, we hypothesized that loss of
Na 1.2 activity could alter the membrane voltage state of the
regeneration buds at 24 hpa. Using the voltage-reporter dye
bis-(1,3-dibutylbarbituric acid) pentamethine oxonol (Di-
BAC4(3)) (Epps et al., 1994), we did not observe any changes
in membrane voltage in the regeneration bud cells of MS-222
treated tails as compared to control (FIGS. 40 and 4P, regen-
eration bud area outlined in red), suggesting that changes in
transmembrane potential are not the mechanism by which
Na 1.2 function controls regenerative behavior.
Since Na, 1.2 controls Na+ levels in the regeneration
bud (FIGS. 3B and 3C), we next tested the hypothesis that
modulation of intracellular Na+ concentration (normally
mediated by Na, 1.2) may be the direct biophysical signal that
induces downstream pathways. Even though Na+ currents
mostly do not act as secondary messengers, a known effector
of Na+ ion-based signaling is the salt-inducible kinase
(SIK1), a member of the AMP-activated protein kinase
(PKA) family and a Class II HDAC kinase that responds to
changes in intracellular Na+ levels (Sanz, 2003). SIK1 is thus
a potential candidate for a molecular sensor of Na, 1.2 activity
during regeneration. Staurosporine (STS) is a Serine/Thero-
nine kinase inhibitor that directly binds SIK1 (Katoh et al.,
2006). Treatment of amputated tails with 10 nM STS signifi-
cantly inhibited tail regeneration, reducing the regenerative
ability to 28% of controls (control RI=226, STS-treated
RI=64, n=52, p<0.001) (FIG. 4Q). Development of the
treated animals was otherwise unaffected. This result sug-
gests SIK1 could act as a specific effector that transduces
physiological Na 1.2 activity into second messenger cas-
cades that can control some of the important functions nec-
essary for tail regeneration.

[PAGE 22] Example 9
Transient Induction of Na+ Current During the
Refractory Period is Sufficient to Induce Regenera-
tion
Mammals exhibit an age-dependent decrease in
regenerative potential (Illingworth, 1974). Similarly, Xeno-
pus also show a reduction of caudal regenerative potential
during the refractory period (Beck et al., 2003). Thus it is an
excellent context to identify the key differences between per-
missible and non-permissible regenerative states. Tails ampu-
tated during the refractory period show a notably thickened,
non-regenerative wound epidermis (WE) by 24 hpa (Beck et
al., 2003). Consistent with the observation that amputations
of tails at non-regenerative stages exhibit altered healing, 18
hpa refractory caudal stumps have a thickened WE (FIG. 5A
(red arrows bracketing WE) and 5A'-width of epidermis out-
lined by dashed red line) compared to a regenerative bud WE
at the same timepoint (FIGS. 5B and 5B'-dashed red line
indicates epidermis width). This observation suggests that at
18 hpa, refractory buds have already completed non-regen-
erative wound healing. Knowing that Na 1.2 is strongly
expressed by 18 hpa in the normal regeneration bud, but not in
amputated refractory tails (FIG. 4D), we hypothesized that
induction of Na+ current mediated by Na, 1.2 in the refractory
tail bud at 18 hpa could be sufficient to promote regeneration.
Although mis-expression of ion transporters is an
important technique for regulating regenerative ability (Ad-
ams et al., 2007), our data suggest a direct role for sodium ions
in this process. Thus, we identified a pharmacological method
that would allow us to modulate sodium transport temporally.
Monensin is an ionophore that selectively transports Na+ ions
into cells (Mollenhauer et al., 1990). Tails of animals in the
refractory stage were amputated and at 18 hpa, treated with 20
uM monensin in a medium containing 90 mM Na+ (normal
culture medium contains 10 mM Na+). To confirm that mon-
ensin induces an increase in intracellular Na+ levels, we used
the CoroNa Green indicator dye to visualize Na+ content in
the amputated caudal region. At 19 hpa (after an one-hour
current induction), normal refractory tail buds show very
weak CoroNa Green signal (FIG. 5C). In contrast, monensin-
treated tails in high Na+ medium showed a strong CoroNa
Green fluorescence at the amputation site (FIG. 5D), demon-
strating that this treatment increases intracellular Na+ content
in the regeneration bud. We then assessed the consequence of
monensin treatment on regeneration. During the refractory
period, tail regenerative ability of Xenopus tadpoles is
extremely poor (R=11.5, n=62). Most animals (89%) failed to
regenerate any tissue in the amputated tails while a small
percentage regenerate poorly (FIG. 5E). Strikingly, treatment
18 hpa with 20 uM monensin in a medium containing 90 mM
Na+ for just one hour induced a significant increase in regen-
erative ability (RI=59.1, n=44, p<0.005) compared to refrac-
tory controls (FIG. 5F). Importantly, the same treatment with
either monensin alone or high extracellular Na+ alone did not
improve regenerative ability (data not shown), showing that
neither monensin nor just high extracellular sodium alone are
capable of this effect: it is the forced sodium influx that results
in regeneration. The sufficiency of a brief transient pulse of
Na+ current at 18 hpa to rescue regeneration in the amputated
refractory tails demonstrates that it is principally the change
in the intracellular Na+ level in the regeneration bud cells that
mediates downstream regenerative pathways (and not any
non-conducting role of Na, 1.2). Most importantly, this
instructive signal does not have to be present at the time of
injury and is not required long term to drive complete regen-
eration.

[PAGE 23] Discussion
The present disclosure summarizes experiments
that revealed a novel role for intracellular sodium in control-
ling regeneration. As a example, tail regeneration in Xenopus
is modulated, at least in part, by intracellular sodium concen-
tration regulated via the voltage-gated sodium channel Na, 1.
2.
The experiments detailed herein provide, in part, a
model for the endogenous pathway that drives tail regenera-
tion in Xenopus. However, these experiments also show that,
although regeneration-essential increases in intracellular
sodium concentration are endogenously mediated by NaV1.2
in this system, intracellular sodium concentration can also be
manipulated using pharmacological reagents including
reagents that permit modulation of intracellular sodium con-
centration without relying on expression of a voltage-gated
sodium channel.

[PAGE 23] Methods
The above experiments were conducted using the
following methods.

[PAGE 23] Tail Regeneration Assay
Хепоpus laevis larvae were cultured using standard
protocols approved for the care of experimental organisms.
Tails at stages 40-41, or stages 45-47 (refractory period)
(Nieuwkoop and Faber, 1967) were amputated under a dis-
secting microscope using a scalpel blade at the midpoint
between the anus and the tip. Tadpoles were cultured in (0.1×
MMR inhibitor) at 22° C. for 7 days and scored for tail
regeneration. Drug experiments were carried out at least in
duplicate.
To quantify and compare regeneration efficiency of
tadpoles treated with different reagents, the "Regeneration
Index" (RI) was determined. The RI evaluates the efficiency
of regeneration for each treatment and allows for comparison
of the effect of various treatments to controls.
Individual animals for each specific treatment were
each scored as follows:
Full: complete regeneration (indistinguishable from
uncut controls).
Good: robust regeneration with minor defects (e.g.,
missing fin, curved axis).
Poor: poor regeneration (hypomorphic/defective
regenerates).
None: no regeneration
For each treatment, the percentage of regenerates
belonging to each category were calculated, and then multi-
plied by 3, 2, 1 or 0, respectively for, Full, Good, Poor and
None. The resulting R1 for each condition tested ranges from
0 to 300, with 0 corresponding to no regeneration, and 300 for
complete regeneration.
Xenopus laevis larvae were cultured via approved
protocols (IACUC #M2008-08). Tails at stages 40-41, or
stages 45-47 (refractory period) (Nieuwkoop and Faber,
1967) were amputated at the midpoint between the anus and
the tip. Tadpoles were cultured in (0.1×MMR±reagent) at 22°
C. for 7 days and scored for tail regeneration. To quantify and
compare regeneration in groups of tadpoles treated with dif-
ferent reagents, we determine the "Regeneration Index" (RI),
ranging from 0 (no regeneration) to 300 (complete regenera-
tion) as previously described in (Adams et al., 2007).


[PAGE 23] RNA Interference
DNA oligos encoding short RNA hairpins (shRNA)
targeting Xenopus Nay 1.2 (GenBank Accession No.
AY121368) or dsRED (GenBank Accession No. AY679106;
Discosoma sp. RC-2004 red fluorescent protein R1 mRNA)
were cloned into the multiple cloning site of a modified
pcDNA3.1 vector downstream of a U6 RNA Pol III promoter,
and also containing a CMV-driven GFP marker (Miskevich et
al., 2006) (gift of F. Miskevich). For the sense strand, the
Na 1.2 (@391 bp) RNAi target sequence is: 5'-GCCATG-
GAGCATTATCCAATG-3' and the dsRED (@597 bp) RNAi
target sequence is: 5'-GTTCAAGTCCATCTACATGGC-3'.
The @ designation indicates where along the nucleic acid
target sequence the RNAi construct begins. These constructs
were micro-injected into 1 or 2-cell stage embryos. The pres-
ence of the shRNA in st.40 tail tissues was identified by the
expression of GFP using fluorescence microscopy.

[PAGE 23] Modulation and Imaging of Sodium Flux
At 23 hpa, tadpoles were incubated in 90 µM of
CoroNa Green indicator dye (Invitrogen) in 0.1×MMR for 45
minutes and washed twice in 0.1×MMR+30 uM BTS (to
immobilize tadpole movement). At 24 hpa, the CoroNa Green
signal was excited at 488 nM and fluorescence emission data
was collected at 592 nM. Data was analyzed using IPLab
software. For induction of Na+ current, 0.1×MMR was
supplemented with sodium gluconate (Sigma) to increase the
Na+ concentration to 90 mM. For refractory period analysis,
tails were amputated at st. 47, at 18 hpa, and animals were
treated with or without 90 mM Na⁺ and 20 μΜ monensin
(Sigma) in 0.1×MMR with 90 µM CoroNa Green for 45
minutes and washed twice in 0.1×MMR+50 uM BTS. Imag-
ing of V, using DiBAC4(3) (Invitrogen) was performed
mem
exactly as described in (Adams et al., 2007).

[PAGE 23] In Situ Hybridization
Embryos were fixed in MEMFA (Sive et al., 2000)
and dehydrated in methanol. In situ hybridization was carried
out according to standard protocols (Harland, 1991) with
probes to: Na, 1.2 (AY121368), Na, 1.5 (Armisen et al.,
2002), Notch1 (Coffman et al., 1990), and Msx1 (Feledy et
al., 1999).

[PAGE 24] Immunohistochemistry
Xenopus embryos were fixed overnight in MEMFA,
heated for 2 hrs at 65° C. in 50% formamide (to inactivate
endogenous alkaline phosphatases), permeabilized in PBTr+
0.1% Triton X100 for 30 min, and processed for immunohis-
tochemistry using alkaline phosphatase secondary antibody
(Levin, 2004) until signal was optimal and background mini-
mal (usually 12 hrs). The expression profiles represent con-
sensus patterns obtained from the analysis of 8-12 embryos at
each stage. Pan-anti-NaV (Sigma S-8809), anti-acetylated
a-tubulin (Sigma #T6793), and anti-phospho-H3 (Upstate
#05-598) antibodies were used at 1:1000.

[PAGE 24] REFERENCES (continued)

[0284] Mollenhauer, H. H., et al., 1990. Alteration of intra-
cellular traffic by monensin; mechanism, specificity and
relationship to toxicity. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1031, 225-
46.
[0285] Mycielska, M. E., Djamgoz, M. B., 2004. Cellular
mechanisms of direct-current electric field effects: gal-
vanotaxis and metastatic disease. J Cell Sci. 117, 1631-9.
[0286] Nieuwkoop, P. D., Faber, J., 1967. Normal Table of
Xenopus laevis (Daudin). North-Holland Publishing Com-
pany, Amsterdam.
[0287] Nuccitelli, R., et al., 1986. On electrical currents in
development. Bioessays. 5, 292-294.
[0288] Onganer, P. U., Djamgoz, M. B., 2005. Small-cell
lung cancer (human): potentiation of endocytic membrane
activity by voltage-gated Na(+) channel expression in
vitro. J Membr Biol. 204, 67-75.
[0289] Onganer, P. U., et al., 2005. Neuronal characteristics
of small-cell lung cancer. Br J Cancer. 93, 1197-201.
[0290] Poss, K. D., et al., 2000. Roles for Fgf signaling
during zebrafish fin regeneration. Developmental Biology.
222, 347-58.
[0291] Poss, K. D., et al., 2002. Heart regeneration in
zebrafish. Science. 298, 2188-90.
[0292] Saka, Y., Smith, J. C., 2001. Spatial and temporal
patterns of cell division during early Xenopus embryogen-
esis. Dev Biol. 229, 307-18.
[0293] Sanz, P., 2003. Snfl protein kinase: a key player in
the response to cellular stress in yeast. Biochem Soc Trans.
31, 178-81.
[0294] Singer, M., 1952. The influence of the nerve in
regeneration of the amphibian extremity. Q Rev Biol. 27,
169-200.
[0295] Singer, M., A theory of the trophic nervous control
of amphibian limb regeneration, including a re-evaluation
of quantiative nerve requirements. Proceedings of Regen-
eration in Animals, 1965.
[0296] Sive, H. L., et al., 2000. Early Development of
Xenopus Laevis. Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press,
New York.
[0297] Slack, J. M., 2003. Regeneration research today.
Dev Dyn. 226, 162-6. Stocum, D. L., Zupanc, G. K., 2008.
Stretching the limits: stem cells in regeneration science.
Dev Dyn. 237, 3648-71.
[0298] Tosteson, M. T., et al., 2003. Effects of palytoxin on
cation occlusion and phosphorylation of the (Na+,K+)-
ATPase. J Membr Biol. 192, 181-9.
[0299] Tseng, A. S., Levin, M., 2008. Tail regeneration in
Xenopus laevis as a model for understanding tissue repair.
J Dent Res. 87, 806-16.
[0300] Yokoyama, H., 2008. Initiation of limb regenera-
tion: the critical steps for regenerative capacity. Dev
Growth Differ. 50, 13-22.

[PAGE 25] INCORPORATION BY REFERENCE

[0301] All publications and patents mentioned herein, are
hereby incorporated by reference in their entirety as if each
individual publication or patent was specifically and indi-
vidually indicated to be incorporated by reference.