Coordinating heart morphogenesis: A novel role
for hyperpolarization-activated cyclic nucleotide-
gated (HCN) channels during cardiogenesis in
Xenopus laevis

Emily Pitcairn, Hannah Harris, Justine Epiney, Vaibhav P. Pai, Joan M. Lemire,
Bin Ye, Nian-Qing Shi, Michael Levin & Kelly A. McLaughlin


[PAGE 2] ABSTRACT
Hyperpolarization-activated cyclic-nucleotide gated channel (HCN) proteins are important
regulators of both neuronal and cardiac excitability. Among the 4 HCN isoforms, HCN4 is known as
a pacemaker channel, because it helps control the periodicity of contractions in vertebrate hearts.
Although the physiological role of HCN4 channel has been studied in adult mammalian hearts, an
earlier role during embryogenesis has not been clearly established. Here, we probe the embryonic
roles of HCN4 channels, providing the first characterization of the expression profile of any of the
HCN isoforms during Xenopus laevis development and investigate the consequences of altering
HCN4 function on embryonic pattern formation. We demonstrate that both overexpression of HCN4
and injection of dominant-negative HCN4 mRNA during early embryogenesis results in improper
expression of key patterning genes and severely malformed hearts. Our results suggest that HCN4
serves to coordinate morphogenetic control factors that provide positional information during
heart morphogenesis in Xenopus.


[PAGE 2] Introduction
Hyperpolarization-activated cyclic nucleotide-gated
channels (HCN) are a family of ion channels that have
been extensively investigated for their roles in cardiac
physiology.1-3 Expressed predominantly in the nervous
system and heart, 4 genes encoding HCN isoforms
(HCN1–4) have been identified in mammals, which have
differential tissue-specific expression and functionality.
Functional channels are composed of 4 subunits that are
arranged around a centrally located pore. HCN channels
are permeable to NaC, KC and Ca2C, and produce cur rents (known as If [funny current] in the heart and Ih in
the nervous system) that have a variety of physiological
functions, such as regulating the spontaneous depolariza tion of adult heart and nerve cells.4,5 HCN4 and HCN2
are the most abundant isoforms in mammalian adult
hearts and are distributed in all regions of the heart that
undergo spontaneous firing (known as the cardiac con duction system).6
In addition to their well-characterized roles in adult
tissues, several studies have reported that HCN4 and
HCN2 are also expressed during early stages of both
murine and chick embryogenesis.7-10 For example, in
mouse embryos, HCN4 mRNA is first expressed in pro genitors of the primary heart field during gastrulation,
well before the heart begins to beat.11 At the beginning
of cardiac looping, it is asymmetrically expressed on the
left side of the sinus venosus, but this asymmetry is
reversed to the right side by the end of looping. Although
HCN2 becomes the dominant isoform in the hearts of
mouse neonates, HCN4 continues to be expressed in the
developing heart, with its expression becoming progres sively restricted to the cardiac conductive system.11-13
Thus, in addition to its pacemaker function, HCN4
channels likely play an earlier role during the develop ment of the embryonic heart. Because HCN4 knockout
in mice leads to lethality before heart maturation, inves tigating novel embryonic roles of HCN4 has been chal lenging in animals with in utero development.14,15
To investigate a potential role for HCN4 channels
during embryonic heart development, we took advantage
of the externally developing vertebrate, Xenopus laevis.
The underlying molecular mechanisms that direct heart
development in Xenopus are highly conserved in all ver tebrate organisms, making it an ideal translational sys tem for mammalian models.16-20 Importantly, unlike
other model organisms, Xenopus embryos develop into
tadpoles in the absence of a working circulatory system.
Thus, it is possible to study early cardiovascular defects
in vivo without the complication of secondary effects
arising from a lack of circulation.
To create a functional heart during development, pre-
cursor cells need to differentiate into cardiac cell types,
and tissues must be properly positioned within the body.
In Xenopus, cardiac progenitors arise during gastrula-
tion, and subsequently migrate as 2 bilateral patches
along the lateral plate mesoderm to the ventral side of
the body after the completion of neurulation. 21,22 As
development proceeds, these 2 heart precursor fields
merge at the ventral midline to create the primary heart
tube. Before the bilateral precardiac fields merge, the
expression of transcription factors such as Nkx2.5 and
GATA-4 initiate the program for differentiation of the
cardiac mesoderm. In addition to the signaling cascades
that direct the differentiation of cardiac cells, patterning
genes are simultaneously expressed that restrict, coordi-
nate, and regulate the orientation and position of the
heart in the body. 23 Specifically, the left-sided expression
of genes such as Xnr-1 and Lefty, establish an asymmetric
field of gene expression between the left and right sides
of an organism. Downstream effector genes like Pitx and
BMP-4, reinforce this asymmetry and translate it to
asymmetric morphogenesis during heart looping and
chamber differentiation. HCN4's asymmetric expression
the cardiac crescent in mice before heart tube forma-
tion¹¹ suggests that it might also regulate organ position
within the body.
Further evidence suggesting a role for HCN4 during
development is the fact that bioelectric signaling through
ion channels has been shown to play a critical role during
tissue formation, patterning, and organogenesis.24-32
These signals establish membrane potentials and voltage
gradients in cells through the unequal distribution of
ions across the plasma membrane. Mutations in ion
channels can lead to serious impairments during embry-
onic development. For example, mutating_a_Na+/K+-
ATPase ion pump leads to abnormalities in heart tube
extension, cardiomyocyte differentiation and cardiac
function in zebrafish embryos.33,34 Mutations in numer-
ous ion channels induce a variety of channelopathies
which manifest in human patients and model species as
birth defects affecting various organs' patterning.35-38
Although most ion channels have been studied in the
contexts of neurobiology and physiology, many are pres-
ent during embryogenesis and could therefore have
instructive patterning roles. 39,40
Here we investigate the roles of HCN4 during
embryogenesis, providing the first characterization of the
expression profile of any of the HCN isoforms during
Xenopus development and functionally investigating the
consequences of altering HCN4 function during heart
development. Both overexpressing HCN4 and injection
of dominant-negative HCN4 mRNA disrupt the localiza-
tion of key morphogenetic patterning genes, Xnr-1, Lefty,
Pitx2, and BMP-4, resulting in hearts with incorrect posi-
tional orientation and morphology. Together, our data
reveal a novel role for HCN4 channels in coordinating
the distribution of critical morphogenetic control factors
during heart development and directing normal heart
morphology.


[PAGE 3] Results
HCN4 is expressed asymmetrically in the developing
heart field of Xenopus
Because mice lacking functional HCN4 channels die
during embryonic development between E9.5-E11.5, it
has been postulated that this lethality results from
atypical cardiac function.14,15 While HCN4 function is
essential for normal pacemaker activity, in both mice
and chickens HCN4 is expressed very early in devel-
opment, well before heart beating is initiated. 10,12,13
To investigate the possibility that HCN4 channels play
an additional and earlier role during cardiogenesis, a
spatio-temporal analysis via whole-mount in situ
hybridization of HCN4 mRNA expression was per-
formed in Xenopus laevis during embryogenesis.
HCN4 transcripts were first robustly detected in the
developing craniofacial region, in 2 bilateral stripes
along the neural tube, and in the developing somites
at the end of neurulation (NF stage 21, Fig. 1A). The
craniofacial and somite expression pattern remained
consistent throughout later tailbud and tadpole stages
(NF stages 25-39, Fig. 1A and B). Expression in the
notochord was discernible in tailbud stages (e,g., NF
stages 25 and 27) and persisted throughout tadpole
stages (Fig. 1A-D). Beginning at NF stage 26, HCN4
transcripts were present in the presumptive heart
region, where they were restricted to the left side of
the developing cardiac field. Shortly thereafter expres-
sion became bilateral in the heart field (NF stage 27,
Fig. 1A) but remained higher on the left side through-
out the later stages of heart development (Fig. 1B).
HCN4 expression was diffusely present in the myocar-
dium at the completion of heart tube formation (NF
stage 29/30, Fig. 1B). This myocardial expression
remained throughout cardiac looping and chamber
septation (NF stage 34 and stage 38/39, Fig. 1B).
Unlike what has been observed in mice, HCN4
expression never became more highly expressed on
the right side of the developing heart. As the sections
in Fig. 1C illustrate, when cardiac differentiation is
beginning during late tailbud stages, HCN4 expression
in the developing cardiac mesoderm was similar to
what has been described for other primary heart field
markers including: Nkx2.5, MLC2a, Tbx5, and
Tbx20.18,41 However, as differentiation and looping
progress, HCN4 expression was observed in both the
myocardial tissue, as well as the septum transversum,
the area where proepicardial precursor cells are
located (Fig. 1D). The pattern of HCN4 expression
observed at these stages is nearly identical to another
marker of the septum transversurm, the epicardial-
associated transcription factor Tbx18 (NF stage 34,
Fig. 1B).42
We further confirmed HCN4s myocardial expression
by examining the protein distribution in the heart via
immunohistochemistry. HCN4 protein was expressed in
the myocardium at NF stage 35, and later at NF stage 46
when heart maturation was complete (Fig. 1E). In both
stages, HCN4 was robustly expressed throughout the
myocardium. Interestingly, similar to what has been
described in neonatal mouse and rat hearts,43 the HCN2
protein was also highly expressed in the myocardium in
NF stage 46 tadpoles (Fig. 1E). Although HCN2 was
robustly expressed in the developing nervous system and
notochord at tailbud stages, HCN2 channel expression
was not detected in the developing heart region during
early stages of cardiogenesis in Xenopus (between NF
stages 26-34, Supplemental Figure 1). Thus, in addition
to its established role in patterning the cardiac conduc-
tion system, the expression of HCN4 and not HCN2, in
the developing heart field before the formation of a beat-
ing heart tube is consistent with additional embryonic
roles during Xenopus cardiogenesis.


[PAGE 4] Functional expression of HCN4-WT and HCN4-DN
(AAA) mutant in HEK293 cells
In humans, inherited mutations in the gene encoding
HCN4 have been shown to cause sinus node dysfunc-
tion. For example, patients who carry a missense
D553N mutation44 or a G480R point mutation 45
develop cardiac arrhythmias. G480 is one of the con-
served amino acid residues within the “GYG” signature
cation selectivity motif of the pore region across species.
This motif is common to an array of potassium-perme-
able channels, and has previously been used to generate
dominant negative constructs for other HCN isoforms
(Fig. 2A).46 We generated the triple amino acid mutant
(“GYG” to “AAA”), and used voltage clamping in
HEK293 cells, which do not have endogenous HCN
expression, to characterize whether the HCN4-DN
(AAA) mutant displayed a dominant-negative effect
(Fig. 2B). Characteristic IHCN4 currents were generated
in cells transfected with wildtype HCN4 in response to
successive hyperpolarizing voltage steps, where larger
voltage steps produced larger channel conductance. In
contrast, in the HCN4-DN(AAA) expressing cells, the
mutant channel showed little IHCN4 currents, with cur-
rents that were at the same magnitude as the negative
vector control (pcDNA3, Fig. 2B). We then tested
whether the HCN4-DN(AAA) could act as a true domi-
nant-negative construct by co-transfecting it with the
wildtype channel. If the HCN4-AAA mutant success-
fully integrated with wildtype subunits to form non-
functional channels, then the currents observed with just
HCN4-WT expression alone should be abolished. Indeed,
when the mutant channel was co-expressed with the
HCN4-WT channel (at 1:1 DNA ratio during transfec-
tion), the hybrid channel did not yield significant IHCN4
currents (Fig. 2B-C; n = 4, *p < 0.05). These data
demonstrate that the HCN4-AAA mutant can result in a
dominant negative effect. Thus, the HCN4-DN(AAA)
mutation was subsequently used to manipulate channel
function in Xenopus embryos.


[PAGE 5] Altering HCN4 leads to morphological and
physiological defects in mature Xenopus hearts, but
does not affect mesodermal or myocardial
differentiation
To ascertain a possible role for HCN4 channels during
the formation of the embryonic heart, we examined
whether overexpressing wildtype HCN4 (HCN4-OE)
or injecting the dominant-negative construct (HCN4-
DN[AAA]) resulted in changes in heart morphology
and physiology. For these experiments, we injected
mRNAs encoding either the wild-type version of
HCN4 (HCN4-[OE]) or a dominant-negative HCN4
mutant (HCN4-DN[AAA]) into one blastomere of
2-cell embryos. To determine if the sidedness of per-
turbation was important, membrane-bound RFP
(mem-RFP) was co-injected as a lineage tracer to con-
firm location of expression in injected animals, and
embryos were sorted for fluorescence on the left vs.
the right side of the body. Heart morphology was
examined after the completion of chamber septation
(NF stage 46) using immunohistochemistry (IHC) for
a Cardiac Troponin-T antibody (myocardial tissue)
that allows visualization of mature heart structures.
Both injection conditions induced abnormal cardiac
phenotypes including twisted hearts, rotated hearts,
unlooped hearts, and hearts with double ventricles
(Fig. 3Aii-v respectively).

[PAGE 5] Figure 2. HCN4 dominant-negative effect test in HEK293 cells. (A) Sequence alignment of mouse HCN channels and other K+ channel
examples that have a signature cation selectivity "GYG” motif at the channel pore region. (B) /HCN currents were elicited by a stepwise
hyperpolarization to -120 mV from a holding potential of -40 mV; and then normalized to membrane capacitance. Representative
/HCN4 current traces recorded in HEK293 cells expressing HCN4-WT, HCN4-DN(AAA) mutant, both HCN4-DN(AAA)/HCN4-WT, or a vector
control are shown. Transfection with HCN4-WT produced robust /HCN4 currents, whereas transfection with HCN4-DN(AAA) did not pro-
duce any current greater than the vector control. When HCN4-WT and HCN4-DN(AAA) were co-transfected, IHCN4 was abolished. (C)
Summary data for the peak /HCN4 currents recorded from HEK293 cells expressing WT-HCN4, HCN4-AAA mutant, HCN4-AAA/WT-HCN4
or vector control, confirming the ability of HCN4-DN(AAA) to act as a dominant-negative construct. n = 4–5, *p < 0.05.

develop cardiac arrhythmias. G480 is one of the con-
served amino acid residues within the “GYG” signature
cation selectivity motif of the pore region across species.
This motif is common to an array of potassium-perme-
able channels, and has previously been used to generate
dominant negative constructs for other HCN isoforms
(Fig. 2A).46 We generated the triple amino acid mutant
(“GYG” to “AAA”), and used voltage clamping in
HEK293 cells, which do not have endogenous HCN
expression, to characterize whether the HCN4-DN
(AAA) mutant displayed a dominant-negative effect
(Fig. 2B). Characteristic IHCN4 currents were generated
in cells transfected with wildtype HCN4 in response to
successive hyperpolarizing voltage steps, where larger
voltage steps produced larger channel conductance. In
contrast, in the HCN4-DN(AAA) expressing cells, the
mutant channel showed little IHCN4 currents, with cur-
rents that were at the same magnitude as the negative
vector control (pcDNA3, Fig. 2B). We then tested
whether the HCN4-DN(AAA) could act as a true domi-
nant-negative construct by co-transfecting it with the
wildtype channel. If the HCN4-AAA mutant success-
fully integrated with wildtype subunits to form non-
functional channels, then the currents observed with just
HCN4-WT expression alone should be abolished. Indeed,
when the mutant channel was co-expressed with the
HCN4-WT channel (at 1:1 DNA ratio during transfec-
tion), the hybrid channel did not yield significant IHCN4
currents (Fig. 2B-C; n = 4, *p < 0.05). These data
demonstrate that the HCN4-AAA mutant can result in a
dominant negative effect. Thus, the HCN4-DN(AAA)
mutation was subsequently used to manipulate channel
function in Xenopus embryos.

Altering HCN4 leads to morphological and
physiological defects in mature Xenopus hearts, but
does not affect mesodermal or myocardial
differentiation

To ascertain a possible role for HCN4 channels during
the formation of the embryonic heart, we examined
whether overexpressing wildtype HCN4 (HCN4-OE)
or injecting the dominant-negative construct (HCN4-
DN[AAA]) resulted in changes in heart morphology
and physiology. For these experiments, we injected
mRNAs encoding either the wild-type version of
HCN4 (HCN4-[OE]) or a dominant-negative HCN4
mutant (HCN4-DN[AAA]) into one blastomere of
2-cell embryos. To determine if the sidedness of per-
turbation was important, membrane-bound RFP
(mem-RFP) was co-injected as a lineage tracer to con-
firm location of expression in injected animals, and
embryos were sorted for fluorescence on the left vs.
the right side of the body. Heart morphology was
examined after the completion of chamber septation
(NF stage 46) using immunohistochemistry (IHC) for
a Cardiac Troponin-T antibody (myocardial tissue)
that allows visualization of mature heart structures.
Both injection conditions induced abnormal cardiac
phenotypes including twisted hearts, rotated hearts,
unlooped hearts, and hearts with double ventricles
(Fig. 3Aii-v respectively).

[PAGE 6] Although tadpoles with malformed hearts were seen
when HCN4 was overexpressed, abnormal heart pheno-
types were observed less frequently in HCN-OE injected
animals than in the HCN4-DN(AAA) expressing tad-
poles (Fig. 3B). In HCN4-DN(AAA) expressing animals,
a significant percentage of mispatterned hearts was
observed compared with stage-matched, uninjected tad-
poles (Fig. 3B, x² = 55.709, df = 2, * p < 0.01). There
was no statistical difference between left-sided expressing
and right-side expressing animals in both HCN4-OE or
HCN4-DN(AAA) conditions. Remarkably, irrespective
of where the HCN4-OE (data not shown) or HCN4-DN
(AAA) (Fig. 4) mRNAs were targeted in the tadpole,
severely malformed hearts were observed, including ani-
mals without any detectable injected HCN4 in the ven-
tral-anterior region where the heart is forming. Thus,
altering the endogenous area of HCN4 function during
early stages of cardiogenesis results aberrant heart phe-
notypes, even when injected mRNAs are expressed out-
side of the heart region in mature tadpoles. We conclude
that HCN4 function is an important endogenous input
into heart patterning, and that HCN4-dependent signal-
ing functions at considerable distance (non-cell-
autonomously).

To examine whether the abnormal heart morphol-
ogy resulted from the global mispatterning of embry-
onic tissues, the expression of several genes expressed
during different stages of development was examined
in HCN4-DN(AAA)-injected embryos (Supplemental
Figure 2). The expression pattern of both Xbra, a pan-
mesodermal gene activated during gastrulation,47 and
Otx2, a broad anterior structure marker expressed dur-
ing gastrulation and neurulation, 48 was similar to
uninjected control embryos (Supplemental Figure 2A).
Similarly, Nkx2.5 expression, which is an important
cardiac field specification gene, was not affected by
injection of HCN4-DN(AAA) during early cardiogene-
sis (NF stage 27), or later cardiac looping (NF stage
32). In addition, the presence of a myocardial-specific
protein (CT3) in HCN4-altered animals (Figs. 3 and
4) provides further support that myocardial differenti-
ation proceeded normally.

[PAGE 7] Since perturbing HCN4 channel function resulted in
altered heart morphology, heart rates were analyzed to
determine if cardiac conduction was also compromised
(Fig. 5). There was no statistical difference between
embryos with HCN4 overexpressed and uninjected, sib-
ling embryos (Fig. 5A). However, all tadpoles injected
with the HCN4-DN(AAA) channel had significantly
faster heart rates (tachycardia) than uninjected sibling
tadpoles confirming the ability of our injected-DN con-
struct to modulate HCN4-dependent bioelectric events
in vivo (Welch's test, *p < 0.05) (Fig. 5B).

[PAGE 7] Altering HCN4 expression disrupts the distribution
of left/right and cardiac morphogenetic patterning
genes

A critical step of creating functional organs during devel-
opment is the final placement of organs inside the body
cavity. All organs are dependent on surrounding tissues
to provide the spatial cues needed to regulate growth,
cell fate, and determine organ position. Previous research
has demonstrated that altering the location of proteins
that direct laterality decisions during development often
results in the misplacement of organs. Because altering
HCN4 channel function resulted in the formation of
mispositioned, but properly differentiated myocardial
tissue at swimming tadpole stages, and the endogenous
channel is asymmetrically expressed in the heart field
during early cardiogenesis, we investigated whether
HCN4 interacts with canonical determinants of organ
laterality during embryogenesis. Xnr-1 is one of the earli-
est regulators of laterality, and its left-sided expression is
required for cardiogenesis to progress normally. 49-51
Therefore, we examined the expression pattern of Xnr-1
at stages when it is asymmetrically expressed in the lat-
eral plate mesoderm at the completion of neurulation
(NF stage 21) in animals injected with either the HCN4-
OE or HCN4-DN(AAA) (Fig. 6). Injection of HCN4-
DN(AAA) induced significantly higher percentages of
abnormal, ectopic patterns of Xnr-1 expression com-
pared with uninjected sibling embryos, including: com-
plete bilateral fields, right-sided expression, and punctate
Xnr-1 expression in both the lateral plate mesoderm as
well as in dorsal region of the larvae (x² = 31.0207, df =
4, *p < 0.05). Interestingly, injecting the dominant-nega-
tive mRNA on the right-side of the body induced the
highest percentage of abnormal Xnr-1 expression pheno-
types (Fig. 6B) with over 50% of HCN4-DN (right)
injected embryos with abnormal ectopic Xnr-1 expres-
sion, although this was not statistically different than
injection on the left side of the body. While Xnr-1
expression was occasionally altered in HCN4-OE
injected animals, these were not statistically different
from uninjected embryos (Fig. 6B).

[PAGE 7] The ectopic, bilateral expression of Xnr-1 ranged from
small partial fields with few Xnr-1 expressing cells
(Fig. 6A iii, yellow arrowhead) to complete Xnr-1 fields
that matched their left-sided counterparts (Fig. 6A ii,
white arrowhead). We also observed punctate dots of
Xnr-1 expression in injected embryos that were located
outside of the normal Xnr-1 field including: along the
midline (Fig. 6A, iii red arrowhead), in the posterior, and
along the flanks of embryos. This ectopic, spotty Xnr-1
expression outside of the lateral plate mesoderm ranged
from one or 2 punctate areas of expression to multiple

[PAGE 8] spots. To our knowledge, this is the first report of
ectopic, punctate Xnr-1 expression, as other previous
studies report only the presence of bilateral expression or
reversed, right-sided expression in response to genetic
manipulations.49-51
Lefty is another patterning gene, which is activated by
Xnr-1 and acts to limit the spatial distribution and dura-
tion of Xnr-1 signaling.52 Its left-sided expression acts as
a barrier to Xnr-1 at the midline, preventing the trans-
duction of "left" signals to the right half of the body.
Lefty is expressed throughout organogenesis, propagat-
ing the polarity established by Xnr-1 through interac-
tions with other downstream factors such as Pitx2 and
BMP-4.53,54 To determine if HCN4 regulates the spatial
organization of Lefty expression in a similar fashion to
Xnr-1, we investigated Lefty expression at stages when
both HCN4 and Lefty transcripts are present in the car-
diac mesoderm (NF stage 27, Figs. 1 and 7, respectively).
Both overexpression and injection of the dominant-neg-
ative mRNA resulted in bilateral Lefty expression. As
observed with Xnr-1, there was a range in the severity of
bilateral expression. Some embryos had a partial second
Lefty field with a gap in expression along the midline
(Fig. 7A, ii). However, in other embryos, Lefty expression
appeared extremely disorganized and encompassed a
large area of the anterior-ventral surface of the animal,
including the midline (Fig. 7A, iii). All injection condi-
tions generated significantly higher percentages of
abnormal Lefty expression compared with uninjected
sibling controls (Fig. 7B, x² = 19.0086, df = 4, p < 0.05).
There was no statistical difference between overexpres-
sion, dominant-negative or sidedness of injection.

[PAGE 9] After axis-patterning genes such as Xnr-1 and Lefty
help to establish sidedness in the body, organ morpho-
genesis must also be carefully regulated such that final
organ asymmetry occurs correctly. Two critical media-
tors of these events, Pitx2 and BMP-4, directly translate
asymmetric gene expression into asymmetric morpho-
genesis in multiple species through independent and
coordinated interactions. 53,55-62 Both Pitx2 and BMP-4
are regulated by Xnr-1 signaling, and work together to
impart laterality to the developing heart tube.56,61 Both
of these genes are asymmetrically expressed along the
left side of the heart tube, providing laterality to the tube
just before the onset of rightward looping. Because mis-
expression of either gene leads to severe positional
defects in embryonic hearts, we examined the expression
of Pitx2 and BMP-4 in HCN4-OE and HCN4-DN(AAA)
injected embryos.
To characterize the relationship of HCN4 expres-
sion to Pitx2 expression, we examined NF stage 27
embryos in HCN4-OE and HCN4-DN(AAA) injected
animals. Both overexpression and injection of the
dominant-negative construct resulted in significantly
higher percentages of abnormal Pitx2 expression pat-
terns compared with uninjected sibling control ani-
mals (Fig. 8, x² = 64.71, df = 4, *p < 0.05). There was
no statistical difference between the overexpression
and dominant-negative conditions, or sidedness of
injection, all of which resulted in altered Pitx2 expres-
sion. Phenotypes included an expansion or reduction
in the size of the endogenous field and bilateral expres-
sion (Fig. 8A, ii, iii, v). Similar to the Xnr-1 and Lefty
results, the bilateral fields were not always equivalent
in size. Many embryos had only a small, partial field
on the right side of the body in addition to the endog-
enous field. No animals were observed to have a com-
plete ablation of Pitx2 expression.

e1309488-8
E. PITCAIRN ET AL.
spots. To our knowledge, this is the first report of
ectopic, punctate Xnr-1 expression, as other previous
studies report only the presence of bilateral expression or
reversed, right-sided expression in response to genetic
manipulations.49-51
Lefty is another patterning gene, which is activated by
Xnr-1 and acts to limit the spatial distribution and dura-
tion of Xnr-1 signaling.52 Its left-sided expression acts as
a barrier to Xnr-1 at the midline, preventing the trans-
duction of "left" signals to the right half of the body.
Lefty is expressed throughout organogenesis, propagat-
ing the polarity established by Xnr-1 through interac-
tions with other downstream factors such as Pitx2 and
BMP-4.53,54 To determine if HCN4 regulates the spatial
organization of Lefty expression in a similar fashion to
Xnr-1, we investigated Lefty expression at stages when
both HCN4 and Lefty transcripts are present in the car-
diac mesoderm (NF stage 27, Figs. 1 and 7, respectively).
Both overexpression and injection of the dominant-neg-
ative mRNA resulted in bilateral Lefty expression. As
observed with Xnr-1, there was a range in the severity of
bilateral expression. Some embryos had a partial second
Lefty field with a gap in expression along the midline
(Fig. 7A, ii). However, in other embryos, Lefty expression
appeared extremely disorganized and encompassed a
large area of the anterior-ventral surface of the animal,
including the midline (Fig. 7A, iii). All injection condi-
tions generated significantly higher percentages of
abnormal Lefty expression compared with uninjected
sibling controls (Fig. 7B, x² = 19.0086, df = 4, p < 0.05).
There was no statistical difference between overexpres-
sion, dominant-negative or sidedness of injection.
After axis-patterning genes such as Xnr-1 and Lefty
help to establish sidedness in the body, organ morpho-
genesis must also be carefully regulated such that final
organ asymmetry occurs correctly. Two critical media-
tors of these events, Pitx2 and BMP-4, directly translate
asymmetric gene expression into asymmetric morpho-
genesis in multiple species through independent and
coordinated interactions. 53,55-62 Both Pitx2 and BMP-4
are regulated by Xnr-1 signaling, and work together to
impart laterality to the developing heart tube.56,61 Both
of these genes are asymmetrically expressed along the
left side of the heart tube, providing laterality to the tube
just before the onset of rightward looping. Because mis-
expression of either gene leads to severe positional
defects in embryonic hearts, we examined the expression
of Pitx2 and BMP-4 in HCN4-OE and HCN4-DN(AAA)
injected embryos.
To characterize the relationship of HCN4 expres-
sion to Pitx2 expression, we examined NF stage 27
embryos in HCN4-OE and HCN4-DN(AAA) injected
animals. Both overexpression and injection of the
dominant-negative construct resulted in significantly
higher percentages of abnormal Pitx2 expression pat-
terns compared with uninjected sibling control ani-
mals (Fig. 8, x² = 64.71, df = 4, *p < 0.05). There was
no statistical difference between the overexpression
and dominant-negative conditions, or sidedness of
injection, all of which resulted in altered Pitx2 expres-
sion. Phenotypes included an expansion or reduction
in the size of the endogenous field and bilateral expres-
sion (Fig. 8A, ii, iii, v). Similar to the Xnr-1 and Lefty
results, the bilateral fields were not always equivalent
in size. Many embryos had only a small, partial field
on the right side of the body in addition to the endog-
enous field. No animals were observed to have a com-
plete ablation of Pitx2 expression.
Because BMP-4 transcripts have a dynamic spatio-
temporal pattern during critical stages of heart develop-
ment and morphogenesis, 63 we examined its expression
profile in injected embryos at 3 different stages of heart
development: before the onset of looping (NF stage 27),
during looping while expression is asymmetric in the
myocardium (NF stage 32), and after the completion of
cardiac looping (NF stage 35). In uninjected embryos,
BMP-4 has a bilateral, wing-shaped pattern beginning at
NF stage 27 (Fig. 9A, i). This pattern becomes increas-
ingly more distinct as looping progress with an area of
asymmetric expression arising in the myocardium dur-
ing these stages (Fig. 9B, i, yellow arrow). At the comple-
tion of looping (NF stage 35), the wing-pattern remains
in the tissue surrounding the heart, and expression
becomes more uniform around the outside layer of the
myocardium (Fig. 9C, i). As Fig. 9D illustrates, all 3
stages investigated had significantly higher percentages
of abnormal expression of BMP-4 in injected animals
(HCN4-OE and HCN4-DN[AAA]) compared with
uninjected sibling controls (NF stage 27: x² = 32.4768,
df = 4; NF stage 32: x² = 82.2366, df = 4; NF stage 35:
x² = 36.0791, df = 4, All: *p < 0.05). Similar abnormal
BMP-4 expression phenotypes were observed in animals
injected with the overexpression or the dominant-nega-
tive mRNA (no statistical difference between HCN4-OE
and HCN4-DN[AAA] conditions, or left vs. right sided
injections). Altering HCN4 function resulted in a global
mispatterning of BMP-4 expression that included either
a reduction in BMP-4 expression or loss of definition in
the boundaries of the field (Fig. 9A ii-iii, 9B ii-iii, 9C ii-
iii). There was no clear pattern in the location of reduc-
tion in embryos; BMP-4 was reduced on either side or
both sides in individual embryos. When there was a loss
in field definition the canonical wing-shaped BMP-4 pat-
tern was no longer distinguishable; however, the area of
BMP-4 expression that lost definition was not consistent
across individuals. Frequently, BMP-4 expression was a
disorganized smear across the ventral side, without wings
or separation along the midline. We also observed a ran-
domization or loss of asymmetric BMP-4 expression in
the myocardium at stage 32, which may have important
implications for final heart morphology. Finally, by stage
35, although the majority of embryos had uniform BMP-
4 expression in the myocardium, heart looping was
abnormal (Fig. 9C ii-iii).

[PAGE 11] DISCUSSION

Interestingly, the disruption of normal dorsal-ante-
rior development, resulting in a reduction of anterior
structures and loss of anterior notochord, results in
abnormal heart left-right asymmetry.64 During embryo-
genesis, Shh signaling helps to establish the dorsoventral
axis, and patterns the midline, including the central ner-
vous system and notochord.65 Thus, to examine if the
aberrant heart phenotypes observed in our experiments
were due to a global mispatterning of the anterior, dor-
sal-midline, we examined the expression of Shh at sev-
eral times during heart development. Embryos injected
with HCN4-OE or HCN4-DN(AAA) were examined for
Shh expression at 3 time points: during gastrulation, at
the completion of neurulation, and during cardiac loop-
ing (Supplemental Figure 2B). In all stages examined,
Shh expression was similar in uninjected control and
injected animals suggesting the dorsal midline structures
were not altered in these experiments.
Taken together, these data illustrate that altering HCN4
channel function during embryogenesis results in atypi-
cal positional orientation and morphogenesis of the
heart. Importantly, the phenotypes observed in HCN4-
DN(AAA) injected animals have a unique heart mor-
phology when compared with what has been previously
observed in studies that disrupted canonical laterality
genes. For example, ectopic right-sided Xnr-1 expression
randomizes heart situs but the hearts are still properly
looped.66 Similarly, overexpression of Lefty on either
side of the body induces heart reversals (situs inversus)
but proper looping and patterning is again maintained.53
In contrast, overexpression of Pitx2 can cause reversal in
heart laterality, straightened outflow tracts, and leads to
chamber malrotation.67 Likewise, inhibition of BMP-4 or
its receptors results in a lack of cardiac looping and mis-
placement of the atria along the midline.56,57 Remark-
ably, the phenotypes we observed in embryos where
HCN4 expression is disrupted appear to be a combina-
tion of inappropriate signals during both the patterning
of early embryonic fields as well as later events during
cardiac morphogenesis such as looping (Fig. 3). It is
important to note that these data also illustrate that heart
mispatterning observed is not a matter of incorrect myo-
cardial differentiation or gross morphological alteration
of all organs and tissues. Both HCN4-OE and HCN4-
DN(AAA) injected embryos expressed the mature myo-
cardial protein, cardiac troponin-T, as well as the cardiac
field marker Nkx2.5, indicating that differentiation
occurred. In addition, the indistinguishable expression
patterns of Xbra, Otx2, and Shh between injected animals
and sibling controls suggest that HCN4 isn't arbitrarily
disrupting axis formation, or germ layer specification,
but rather it is specifically interacting with the genes that
determine organ positioning.
Physiologically, only injection of HCN4-DN(AAA)
significantly affected heart rate, with injected embryos
displaying tachycardia. Tachycardia has also been
described in human HCN4 loss of function mutations: a
c-linker interaction mutant and a trafficking-defective
mutant. 44,68 Importantly, both mutations occurred
endogenously in patients, and the c-linker mutation was
inherited across 4 generations of affected individuals.
This suggests that the presence of a functioning HCN4
channel is required to properly pattern the cardiac con-
duction system, and this role is highly conserved across
vertebrates; however, it is also possible that the abnormal
heart rate is due to disrupted heart morphology or vice
versa.
Our results demonstrating the altered expression of
numerous morphogenetic control factors suggest a novel
role for HCN4 during embryogenesis: coordinating the
positional identity of cells needed to create functional
organs via directing the distribution of important pat-
terning molecules. The distribution of key signaling fac-
tors appears to be dependent on the correct function of
HCN4 as both perturbations (overexpression and domi-
nant-negative) induced similar phenotypes. Although
Lefty, Pitx2, and BMP-4 expression was disrupted in
embryos overexpressing HCN4, it seems that embryos
can somewhat compensate for these molecular aberra-
tions because many of the embryos in those populations
were able to form normal hearts. This form of compen-
sation has recently been described in Xenopus organ lat-
erality, where disruptions in upstream gene signaling did
not always induce downstream changes in organ situs.69
In sharp contrast, embryos with the dominant-negative
construct ultimately have abnormal heart morphology,
positioning and heart physiology. Combined, these data
indicate that HCN4 channel function is required for the
correct distribution of morphogenetic patterning genes
during cardiogenesis, and contributes to directing final
heart morphology. It should be noted that because Xnr-1
is upstream of Lefty, Pitx2, and BMP-4, it is possible that
HCN4 interacts with Xnr-1 primarily, and subsequent
changes in gene expression are a result of disrupted Xnr-
1 signaling.
These findings serve to expand the known roles of this
important channel family, and reveal a new set of bio-
electric inputs into cardiac organogenesis. This is not the
first time an ion channel has been implicated in the dis-
tribution of patterning genes. For examples, during Dro-
sophila wing formation, the inward rectifying potassium
channel Irk2 is necessary for the correct dispersal of
Dpp, the Drosophila homolog of BMP.70 Knocking down
the channel led to phenotypes that were similar to BMP
mutant phenotypes, and reducing Dpp signaling exacer-
bated abnormal phenotypes. Similar developmental
defects were also observed when the vertebrate homolog
of the channel, Kir2.1, was disrupted during both Xeno-
pus and mouse embryogenesis.70-72 Again, the morpho-
logical defects were similar to those seen in defective
TGFβ signaling. Taken together, these results combined
with our study suggest that ion channel activity can play
a significant role impacting gene expression patterns that
feed into crucial aspects of embryogenesis.
One question that remains is how changes in ion
channel function might instruct changes in the distribu-
tion of critical developmental genes. HCN4 could poten-
tially regulate either the generation or the propagation of
morphogenetic factors as altering its expression fre-
quently led to a reduction in gene expression. Previous
studies have shown that ion channels have reciprocal
interactions with integrins found in the membrane, and
these interactions affect downstream signaling
responses.73 In fact, in adult hearts HCN4 complexes
with B2-adrenergic receptors to modulate the funny cur-
rent and subsequent heart rate.74 Therefore, it is possible
that during embryogenesis fluxes through ion channels
help to coordinate the distribution of ligands and recep-
tors in the membrane that interact with morphogenetic
proteins. For example, the BMP antagonist Noggin binds
to heparin sulfate proteoglycans in cell membranes to
modify the distribution of BMP, and this interaction can
only occur within a specific concentration of Na+ pres-
ent.75 Potentially, channels such as HCN4 change the
concentration of specific ionic species, altering not only
membrane potential but also the localization, modifica-
tion state, or interactions of critical transmembrane
receptors. Likewise, modulation of resting potential by a
variety of ion channels is known to regulate transcription

[PAGE 12] MATERIALS AND METHODS

Animal husbandry and embryo culture

All animals were treated humanely and with regard for
alleviation of suffering according to approved protocols
(Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee Protocol
Tufts University). Adult female Xenopus laevis were
induced to ovulate via injection of chorionic gonadotro-
pin hormone (Chorulon) and eggs were fertilized in
vitro. After fertilization, eggs were dejellied in a 2% cyste-
ine solution (pH 8) and reared in 0.1X Marc's Modified
Ringer's solution (Stock solution: 10X MMR; 100 mM
NaCl, 2 mM KCl, 1 mM MgCl2, 2 mM CaCl2, 5 mM
HEPES, 10 μM EDTA, pH 7.4) at 14-18°C. Embryos
and tadpoles were staged according to Nieuwkoop and
Faber. 81
Molecular cloning of constructs

A mouse HCN4-WT cDNA clone was kindly provided
by Dr. Richard Robinson (Columbia University). Using
a standard strategy for abolishing channel function by
altering the highly conserved cation selectivity sequence
in the pore domain (changed from GYG349-351 to
AAA349-351;,46,82,83 the HCN4-(AAA) mutant was gener-
ated in WT-HCN4 using primers: 5' CACATGCTGTG-
CATTGAGGACGAACGTCAGGCA-3′ (forward) and
5'-TGCCTGA CGTTCGTCCTCAATGCACAGCATGT
G-3' (reverse). For recordings of IHCN4 currents in mam-
malian cell culture experiments, a WT or HCN4(AAA)
mutant construct was sub-cloned into a bi-cistronic vec-
tor, pIRESGFP1 (a kind gift from Dr. David Johns, John
Hopkins University), to create a CMVp-HCN4-IRES-
eGFP fusion for subsequent expression studies. An
empty vector pcDNA3 (Life Technologies, Grand Island,
NY) was used as a negative control in electrophysiologi-
cal recording experiments.
HCN4 constructs were used to transcribe HCN4-WT
(overexpression [OE]) or HCN4-(AAA) (dominant neg-
ative) mRNAs for Xenopus laevis microinjection, both
HCN constructs were subcloned into a pCS2 vector. The
membrane-bound RFP that was microinjected as a line-
age tracer was a gift from Dr. John Wallingford (Univer-
sity of Texas-Austin).

Cell culture, transfection and recording
of IHCN4 currents

HEK293 cells were routinely maintained in Dulbecco's
Modified Eagle's Medium supplemented with 10% fetal
bovine serum, 100 ug/ml penicillin and 100 ug/ml strep-
tomycin at 37°C as described previously. 84 Transfection
was performed using a Fugene6 kit following manufac-
turer's instructions (Roche, Indianapolis, IN). For volt-
age clamping analysis, approximately 1×105 cells were
seeded in a 35-mm culture dish. 0.7 µg DNA was tran-
siently transfected into HEK293 cells. In all experiments,
the transfected cells were cultured for 24 hours to allow
protein expression.
Whole cell-based HCN4 currents (IHCN4) were
recorded from transfected HEK293 cells at room temper-
ature as described previously. 85,86 The extracellular
recording solution contained: 110mM NaCl, 0.5 mM
MgCl2, 30 mM KCl, 1.8 mM CaCl2, and 5mM HEPES.
Recording pipettes contained: 10 mM NaCl, 0.5mM
MgCl2, 130 mM KCl, 5 mM HEPES, and 1mM EGTA.
Cells expressing eGFP were subjected to voltage clamp-
ing measurements. IHCN4 was evoked in response to
hyperpolarizing voltage steps to potentials between -60
and -130 mV from a holding potential of -40 mV.
Data were collected by an Axopatch 200B amplifier
interfaced to a Digidata 1322A acquisition system, and
analyzed using a pCLAMP10 software package (Molecu-
lar Devices, Sunnyvale, CA).

e1309488-12
E. PITCAIRN ET AL.
of genes such as Notch" and of many other targets con-
served from amphibian to human.77 Many studies have
also implicated bioelectrical control of the movement of
small molecule signals (such as calcium, butyrate, and
serotonin) that transduce voltage changes into second
messenger cascades and alterations of transcription39,78
of numerous downstream targets that are well-conserved
among human and amphibian bioelectrical signaling
responses.
79
One other important hypothesis to consider is the
importance of temporal, as well as spatial, patterning of
bioelectrical activity. Numerous studies have shown
HCN channels regulate membrane potential in a cyclical
manner. This type of clock-like signaling might be nec-
essary in developing tissues to modulate patterning genes
both spatially and temporally. This is consistent with a
potential voltage threshold or cyclic pulsing of mem-
brane potential that must occur to achieve correct posi-
tional identity; hypotheses that will be tested with
further development of in vivo optogenetic tools that
may allow a finer temporal dissection of ionic signaling
in development.80 Finally, although we have presented
evidence that altering HCN4 expression during embryo-
genesis causes incorrect positioning of hearts, future
studies are needed to dissect out the molecular mecha-
nism and timing of this phenotype. Overall, the data pre-
sented here highlight a novel role for the clinically
important HCN4 channel, and suggest early embryonic
physiology as a tractable target for modulation of key
development gene expression programs.

[PAGE 13] Materials and methods

Animal husbandry and embryo culture

All animals were treated humanely and with regard for
alleviation of suffering according to approved protocols
(Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee Protocol
Tufts University). Adult female Xenopus laevis were
induced to ovulate via injection of chorionic gonadotro-
pin hormone (Chorulon) and eggs were fertilized in
vitro. After fertilization, eggs were dejellied in a 2% cyste-
ine solution (pH 8) and reared in 0.1X Marc's Modified
Ringer's solution (Stock solution: 10X MMR; 100 mM
NaCl, 2 mM KCl, 1 mM MgCl2, 2 mM CaCl2, 5 mM
HEPES, 10 μM EDTA, pH 7.4) at 14-18°C. Embryos
and tadpoles were staged according to Nieuwkoop and
Faber. 81

Molecular cloning of constructs

A mouse HCN4-WT cDNA clone was kindly provided
by Dr. Richard Robinson (Columbia University). Using
a standard strategy for abolishing channel function by
altering the highly conserved cation selectivity sequence
in the pore domain (changed from GYG349-351 to
AAA349-351;,46,82,83 the HCN4-(AAA) mutant was gener-
ated in WT-HCN4 using primers: 5' CACATGCTGTG-
CATTGAGGACGAACGTCAGGCA-3′ (forward) and
5'-TGCCTGA CGTTCGTCCTCAATGCACAGCATGT
G-3' (reverse). For recordings of IHCN4 currents in mam-
malian cell culture experiments, a WT or HCN4(AAA)
mutant construct was sub-cloned into a bi-cistronic vec-
tor, pIRESGFP1 (a kind gift from Dr. David Johns, John
Hopkins University), to create a CMVp-HCN4-IRES-
eGFP fusion for subsequent expression studies. An
empty vector pcDNA3 (Life Technologies, Grand Island,
NY) was used as a negative control in electrophysiologi-
cal recording experiments.
HCN4 constructs were used to transcribe HCN4-WT
(overexpression [OE]) or HCN4-(AAA) (dominant neg-
ative) mRNAs for Xenopus laevis microinjection, both
HCN constructs were subcloned into a pCS2 vector. The
membrane-bound RFP that was microinjected as a line-
age tracer was a gift from Dr. John Wallingford (Univer-
sity of Texas-Austin).

Cell culture, transfection and recording
of IHCN4 currents

HEK293 cells were routinely maintained in Dulbecco's
Modified Eagle's Medium supplemented with 10% fetal
bovine serum, 100 ug/ml penicillin and 100 ug/ml strep-
tomycin at 37°C as described previously. 84 Transfection
was performed using a Fugene6 kit following manufac-
turer's instructions (Roche, Indianapolis, IN). For volt-
age clamping analysis, approximately 1×105 cells were
seeded in a 35-mm culture dish. 0.7 µg DNA was tran-
siently transfected into HEK293 cells. In all experiments,
the transfected cells were cultured for 24 hours to allow
protein expression.
Whole cell-based HCN4 currents (IHCN4) were
recorded from transfected HEK293 cells at room temper-
ature as described previously. 85,86 The extracellular
recording solution contained: 110mM NaCl, 0.5 mM
MgCl2, 30 mM KCl, 1.8 mM CaCl2, and 5mM HEPES.
Recording pipettes contained: 10 mM NaCl, 0.5mM
MgCl2, 130 mM KCl, 5 mM HEPES, and 1mM EGTA.
Cells expressing eGFP were subjected to voltage clamp-
ing measurements. IHCN4 was evoked in response to
hyperpolarizing voltage steps to potentials between -60
and -130 mV from a holding potential of -40 mV.
Data were collected by an Axopatch 200B amplifier
interfaced to a Digidata 1322A acquisition system, and
analyzed using a pCLAMP10 software package (Molecu-
lar Devices, Sunnyvale, CA).

[PAGE 13] Microinjection of mRNA into Xenopus embryos

Capped mRNAs were synthesized in vitro using the Sp6
mMessage Machine kit (Invitrogen). Cleavage stage
embryos were injected in either the left or right blastomere
at the 2-cell stage with mRNAs encoding either 350pg
wild-type mouse HCN4 (HCN4-WT) or 500pg dominant-
negative mouse HCN4 pore mutant (HCN4-DN[AAA]).
Embryos injected with HCN4 mRNAs were co-injected
with membrane-bound RFP (300pg) as a lineage tracer.
After microinjection into cleavage stage Xenopus
embryos, embryos healed in 1X MMR overnight. Before
the onset of gastrulation, the MMR was gradually
reduced to 0.1X MMR, and embryos were raised in 0.1X
MMR until they reached the desired stage, at which point
they were sorted for fluorescent expression to confirm
the presence and location of injected constructs. Prior to
molecular analysis, embryos were killed with 5% tricaine
(pH 7.2, MS-222, Acros Organics) and fixed for 1 hour
at room temperature in MEMFA (0.1 M MOPS pH 7.4,
2 mM EGTA, 1 mM MgSO4, 3.7% formaldehyde).

[PAGE 13] Heart rate analysis

To determine if heart function was affected, the heart
rate of 10 individual tadpoles per injection group was
measured for a total of 30 embryos across 3 replicates. N.
F. stage 46/47 tadpoles were lightly anesthetized in a
petri dish with 0.1X MMR. 10-second videos of the beat-
ing hearts were recorded using a Canon RebelT5i cam-
era. MPEG Streamclip software was used to reduce video
speed for heart-rate analysis. Heart rates were calculated
by dividing the number of beats by the time difference
between the last and first diastole (when the ventricle is
the least contracted). To account for replicate variation
and differences in external factors such as season and
room temperature, all experimental rates were normal-
ized to the mean of control rates in each replicate.

[PAGE 13] In situ hybridization (ISH)

The localization of mRNA transcripts was evaluated by
whole-mount ISH as described previously.87 Briefly, tad-
poles were hybridized with digoxigenin-labeled antisense
riboprobes, and expression was visualized using an anti-
digoxigenin antibody conjugated to alkaline-phosphatase
(Roche) and a purple BCIP/NBT precipitate. After the
chromogenic reaction finished, embryos were fixed in
MEMFA for 1 hour at room temperature or overnight at
4°C and either kept in 1X PBS at 4°C or dehydrated in
100% methanol for long-term storage at -20°C. Antisense
RNA probes included: BMP-4,88 Pitx2,61 Xnr-1,66 Lefty, 89
Otx2,48 Xbra, Shhº and HCN2 (X. laevis hcn2.L IMAGE
clone 5514485, which was purchased from Dharmacon
and a HindIII fragment was deleted, leaving exons 2–4 and
part of exon 5 as probe). HCN4 transcripts were detected
using an antisense HCN4 probe that was constructed as a
synthetic DNA (Invitrogen) and cloned into vector PCRII
Topo (Invitrogen). The synthetic sequence corresponded
to parts of exon 1 and 3, and all of exon 2, of the RNA
model Xelaev18020786m, of the gene annotated as hcn4.S,
at position chr3S:59295253–59295679 of X. laevis genome
build 9.1 (http://www.xenbase.org). The region synthe-
sized was chosen because it had high similarity to homo-
log hcn4.L. Sense control probes were developed and
tested to ensure the specificity of the probes.

[PAGE 13] Immunohistochemistry, immunofluorescence, and
heart morphology scoring

Immunohistochemistry (IHC) and immunofluorescence
was used to detect the localization of proteins in whole
mount and on section. Euthanized tadpoles were per-
meabilized with PBTr (1X PBS, 0.1% Triton, 2 mg/ml
bovine serum albumin [BSA]), blocked with 20% heat-
inactivated goat serum in PBTr, and incubated with the
primary antibody overnight at 4°C. After 5 hrs of PBTr
washes, tadpoles were blocked and incubated overnight
in goat anti-mouse IgG secondary antibodies conjugated
to Alexa Fluor 555 (AF-555; 1:300; Invitrogen). Then,
tadpoles were again washed in PBTr for 5 hours, rinsed
in 1X PBS, and post fixed in MEMFA, for 1 hr. Protein
expression was detected through fluorescence using a
Zeiss Imager.M1 scope and Cy3 filter cube. For paraffin
embedded sections, slides were first dewaxed in xylene,
rehydrated through a series of ethanol washes, and then
chromogenic IHC was performed as described previ-
ously.91 Expression was detected through the presence of
a purple precipitate from the chromogenic reaction. The
following markers were assessed through IHC: CT3
(Developmental Studies Hybridoma Bank), HCN4
(Abcam ab69054), and HCN2 (Abcam ab84817). Hearts
were examined for any aberrant phenotypes using a
stringent scoring rubric that classified deviations from
normal heart situs (in any direction) as abnormal, even if
they were mild. Hearts were characterized as twisted
when the chambers were displaced along the dorso-ven-
tral (DV) axis. Rotated hearts were displaced along the
left-right (LR) axis but in the same DV plane. Hearts
were classified as unlooped when the outflow tract was
improperly folded with respect to the ventricle.

[PAGE 13] Histology

For sectioning, dehydrated embryos were gradually
transferred to 100% ethanol. Next, embryos were cleared
in 2 subsequent 45-min Xylene washes and tissues were
infiltrated with paraffin wax in 2 20-min incubations at
60°C. Embryos were then wax-embedded in molds and
allowed to solidify overnight. Using a Leica 2255 rotary
microtome, 10 or 15 µm sections were generated and
fixed on Superfrost Plus glass slides. The slides were dew-
axed using Xylene and mounted with Permount (Fisher
Scientific). Sections were examined using a Nikon
SMZ1700 microscope and pictures were taken using
SpotIn-light Color Camera software.

[PAGE 14] Statistical analysis

All statistical analyses were performed using IBM SPSS
statistics version 22 or R version 3.1.2, Pumpkin helmet.92
For all categorical phenotype data, significance was
assessed using a chi-square test (R, statistics package). In
each chi-square analysis all abnormal categories were
grouped into one to make it a binary comparison (normal
vs. abnormal). The fifer package was used to analyze all
pairwise comparisons in each chi-square test.” For heart
rate data, significance was assessed using a Welch's test
due to unequal variance in our data sets (SPSS).

[PAGE 14] Disclosure of potential conflicts of interest

No potential conflicts of interest were disclosed.

[PAGE 14] Acknowledgments

The authors would like to thank members of the McLaughlin
and Levin laboratories for discussions and support.

[PAGE 14] Funding

This research was conducted with Government support under
and awarded by DoD, Air Force Office of Scientific Research,
National Defense Science and Engineering Graduate (NDSEG)
Fellowship, 32 CFR 168a (E. Pitcairn). This work was sup-
ported by awards from IOS-NSF (KM), АНА (ML/KM, NQS,
BY), and by the Allen Discovery Center program through The
Paul G. Allen Frontiers Group (ML/KM).

[PAGE 17] REFERENCES

[43] Shi W, Wymore R, Yu H, Wu J, Wymore RT, Pan Z, Robinson RB, Dixon JE, McKinnon D, Cohen IS. Distribution and prevalence of hyperpolarization-activated cation channel (HCN) mRNA expression in cardiac tissues. Circ Res 1999; 85:e1-6; PMID:10400919; https://doi.org/10.1161/01.RES.85.1.el
[44] Ueda K, Nakamura K, Hayashi T, Inagaki N, Takahashi M, Arimura T, Morita H, Higashiuesato Y, Hirano Y, Yasunami M, et al. Functional characterization of a trafficking-defective HCN4 mutation, D553N, associated with cardiac arrhythmia. J Biol Chem 2004; 279:27194-8; PMID:15123648; https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M311953200
[45] Nof E, Luria D, Brass D, Marek D, Lahat H, Reznik-Wolf H, Pras E, Dascal N, Eldar M, Glikson M. Point mutation in the HCN4 cardiac ion channel pore affecting synthesis, trafficking, and functional expression is associated with familial asymptomatic sinus bradycardia. Circulation 2007; 116:463-70; PMID:17646576; https://doi.org/10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.107.706887
[46] Xue T, Marbán E, Li RA. Dominant-negative suppression of HCN1- and HCN2-encoded pacemaker currents by an engineered HCN1 construct: insights into structure-function relationships and multimerization. Circ Res 2002; 90:1267-73; PMID:12089064; https://doi.org/10.1161/01.RES.0000024390.97889.C6
[47] Smith J, Price B, Green J, Weigel D, Herrmann B. Expression of a Xenopus homolog of Brachyury (T) is an immediate-early response to mesoderm induction. Cell 1991; 67:79-87; PMID:1717160; https://doi.org/10.1016/0092-8674(91)90573-H
[48] Pannese M, Polo C, Andreazzoli M, Vignali R, Kablar B, Barsacchi G, Boncinelli E. The Xenopus homologue of Otx2 is a maternal homeobox gene that demarcates and specifies anterior body regions. Development 1995; 121:707-20; PMID:7720578
[49] Foley AC, Korol O, Timmer AM, Mercola M. Multiple functions of Cerberus cooperate to induce heart downstream of Nodal. Dev Biol 2007; 303:57-65; PMID:17123501; https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ydbio.2006.10.033
[50] Sampath K, Cheng A, Frisch A, Wright C. Functional differences among Xenopus nodal-related genes in left-right axis determination. Development 1997; 124:3293-302; PMID:9310324
[51] Lohr JL, Danos MC, Yost HJ. Left-right asymmetry of a nodal-related gene is regulated by dorsoanterior midline structures during Xenopus development. Dev Suppl 1997; 124:1465-72
[52] Wagner M, Siddiqui MA. Signal transduction in early heart development (I): cardiogenic induction and heart tube formation. Exp Biol Med 1997; 232:852-65
[53] Branford WW, Essner JJ, Yost HJ. Regulation of gut and heart left-right asymmetry by context-dependent interactions between Xenopus lefty and BMP4 signaling. Dev Biol 2000; 223:291-306; PMID:10882517; https://doi.org/10.1006/dbio.2000.9739
[54] Cheng A, Thisse B, Thisse C, Wright C. The lefty-related factor Xatv acts as a feedback inhibitor of nodal signaling in mesoderm induction and LR axis development in xenopus. Development 2000; 127:1049-61; PMID:10662644
[55] Chang H, Zwijsen A, Vogel H, Huylebroeck D, Matzuk MM. Smad5 is essential for left-right asymmetry in mice. Dev Biol 2000; 219:71-8; PMID:10677256; https://doi.org/10.1006/dbio.1999.9594
[56] Breckenridge RA, Mohun TJ, Amaya E. A role for BMP signalling in heart looping morphogenesis in Xenopus. Dev Biol 2001; 232:191-203; PMID:11254357; https://doi.org/10.1006/dbio.2001.0164
[57] Chocron S, Verhoeven MC, Rentzsch F, Hammerschmidt M, Bakkers J. Zebrafish Bmp4 regulates left-right asymmetry at two distinct developmental time points. Dev Biol 2007; 305:577-88; PMID:17395172; https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ydbio.2007.03.001
[58] Chen JN, van Eeden FJ, Warren KS, Chin A, Nüsslein-Volhard C, Haffter P, Fishman MC. Left-right pattern of cardiac BMP4 may drive asymmetry of the heart in zebrafish. Development 1997; 124:4373-82; PMID:9334285
[59] Ai D, Liu W, Ma L, Dong F, Lu MF, Wang D, Verzi MP, Cai C, Gage PJ, Evans S, et al. Pitx2 regulates cardiac left-right asymmetry by patterning second cardiac lineage-derived myocardium. Dev Biol 2006; 296:437-49; PMID:16836994; https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ydbio.2006.06.009
[60] Shiratori H, Yashiro K, Shen MM, Hamada H. Conserved regulation and role of Pitx2 in situs-specific morphogenesis of visceral organs. Development 2006; 133:3015-25; PMID:16835440; https://doi.org/10.1242/dev.02470
[61] Campione M, Steinbeisser H, Schweickert A, Deissler K, van Bebber F, Lowe LA, Nowotschin S, Viebahn C, Haffter P, Kuehn MR, et al. The homeobox gene Pitx2: mediator of asymmetric left-right signaling in vertebrate heart and gut looping. Development 1999; 126:1225-34; PMID:10021341
[62] Dagle JM, Sabel JL, Littig JL, Sutherland LB, Kolker SJ, Weeks DL. Pitx2c attenuation results in cardiac defects and abnormalities of intestinal orientation in developing Xenopus laevis. Dev Biol 2003; 262:268-81; PMID:14550790; https://doi.org/10.1016/S0012-1606(03)00389-0
[63] Shi Y, Katsev S, Cai C, Evans S. BMP signaling is required for heart formation in vertebrates. Dev Biol 2000; 224:226-37; PMID:10926762; https://doi.org/10.1006/dbio.2000.9802
[64] Danos MC, Yost HJ. Linkage of Cardiac Left-Right Asymmetry and Dorsal-Anterior Development in Xenopus. Development 1995; 121:1467-74; PMID:7789276
[65] Peyrot SM, Wallingford JB, Harland RM. A revised model of Xenopus dorsal midline development: differential and separable requirements for Notch and Shh signaling. Dev Biol 2011; 352:254-66; PMID:21276789; https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ydbio.2011.01.021
[66] Sampath K, Cheng AM, Frisch A, Wright CV. Functional differences among Xenopus nodal-related genes in left-right axis determination. Development 1997; 124:3293-302; PMID:9310324
[67] Essner JJ, Branford WW, Zhang J, Yost HJ. Mesendoderm and left-right brain, heart and gut development are differentially regulated by pitx2 isoforms. Development 2000; 127:1081-93; PMID:10662647
[68] Duhme N, Schweizer PA, Thomas D, Becker R, Schröter J, Barends TR, Schlichting I, Draguhn A, Bruehl C, Katus HA, et al. Altered HCN4 channel C-linker interaction is associated with familial tachycardia-bradycardia syndrome and atrial fibrillation. Euro Heart J 2013; 34:2768-75; PMID:23178648; https://doi.org/10.1093/eurheartj/ehs391
[69] McDowell GS, Rajadurai S, Levin M. From cytoskeletal dynamics to organ asymmetry: a non-linear, regulative pathway underlies left-right patterning. bioRxiv 2016; 371(1710):pii: 20150409; 052191
[70] Dahal GJ, Rawson J, Gassaway B, Kwok B, Tong Y, Ptácek LJ, Bates E. An inwardly rectifying K+ channel is required for patterning. Development 2012; 139:3653-64; PMID:22949619; https://doi.org/10.1242/dev.078592
[71] Bates EA. A potential molecular target for morphological defects of fetal alcohol syndrome: Kir2. 1. Curr Opin Genet Dev 2013; 23:324-9; https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gde.2013.05.001
[72] Adams DS, Uzel SG, Akagi J, Wlodkowic D, Andreeva V, Yelick PC, Devitt-Lee A, Pare JF, Levin M. Bioelectric signalling via potassium channels: a mechanism for craniofacial dysmorphogenesis in KCNJ2-associated Andersen-Tawil Syndrome. J Physiol 2016; 594(12):3245-70
[73] Arcangeli A, Becchetti A. Complex functional interaction between integrin receptors and ion channels. Trends Cell Biol 2006; 16:631-9; PMID:17064899; https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tcb.2006.10.003
[74] Greene D, Kang S, Kosenko A, Hoshi N. Adrenergic regulation of HCN4 channel requires protein association with β2-adrenergic receptor. J Biol Chem 2012; 287:23690-7; PMID:22613709; https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M112.366955
[75] Paine-Saunders S, Viviano BL, Economides AN, Saunders S. Heparan sulfate proteoglycans retain Noggin at the cell surface a potential mechanism for shaping bone morphogenetic protein gradients. J Biol Chem 2002; 277:2089-96; PMID:11706034; https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M109151200
[76] Raya A, Kawakami Y, Rodríguez-Esteban C, Ibañes M, Rasskin-Gutman D, Rodríguez-León J, Büscher D, Feijó JA, Izpisúa Belmonte JC. Notch activity acts as a sensor for extracellular calcium during vertebrate left-right determination. Nature 2004; 427:121-8; PMID:14712268; https://doi.org/10.1038/nature02190
[77] Pai VP, Martyniuk CJ, Echeverri K, Sundelacruz S, Kaplan DL, Levin M. Genome-wide analysis reveals conserved transcriptional responses downstream of resting potential change in Xenopus embryos, axolotl regeneration, and human mesenchymal cell differentiation. Regeneration 2015; 3(1):3-25; PMID:27499876
[78] Tseng AS, Levin M. Transducing bioelectric signals into epigenetic pathways during tadpole tail regeneration. Anat Rec 2012; 295:1541-51; https://doi.org/10.1002/ar.22495
[79] Pai VP, Martyniuk CJ, Echeverri K, Sundelacruz S, Kaplan DL, Levin M. Genome-wide analysis reveals conserved transcriptional responses downstream of resting potential change in Xenopus embryos, axolotl regeneration, and human mesenchymal cell differentiation. Regeneration (Oxf) 2016; 3:3-25; PMID:27499876; https://doi.org/10.1002/reg2.48
[80] Spencer AD, Lemire JM, Kramer RH, Levin M. Optogenetics in Developmental Biology: using light to control ion flux-dependent signals in Xenopus embryos. Int J Dev Biol 2014; 58:851-61; PMID:25896279; https://doi.org/10.1387/ijdb.140207ml
[81] Niewkoop PD, Faber J. Normal Table of Xenopus laevis (Daudin). (Garland Publishing, Inc., 1994)
[82] Kuzhikandathil EV, Oxford GS. Dominant-negative mutants identify a role for GIRK channels in D3 dopamine receptor-mediated regulation of spontaneous secretory activity. J Gen Physiol 2000; 115:697-706; PMID:10828244; https://doi.org/10.1085/jgp.115.6.697
[83] Preisig-Müller R, Schlichthörl G, Goerge T, Heinen S, Brüggemann A, Rajan S, Derst C, Veh RW, Daut J. Heteromerization of Kir2.x potassium channels contributes to the phenotype of Andersen's syndrome. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2002; 99:7774-9; PMID:12032359; https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.102609499
[84] Ye B, Valdivia CR, Ackerman MJ, Makielski JC. A common human SCN5A polymorphism modifies expression of an arrhythmia causing mutation. Physiol Genomics 2003; 12:187-93; PMID:12454206; https://doi.org/10.1152/physiolgenomics.00117.2002
[85] Ye B, Balijepalli RC, Foell JD, Kroboth S, Ye Q, Luo YH, Shi NQ. Caveolin-3 associates with and affects the function of hyperpolarization-activated cyclic nucleotide-gated channel 4. Biochemistry 2008; 47:12312-8; PMID:19238754; https://doi.org/10.1021/bi8009295
[86] Ye B, Nerbonne JM. Proteolytic processing of HCN2 and co-assembly with HCN4 in the generation of cardiac pacemaker channels. J Biol Chem 2009; 284:25553-9; PMID:19574228; https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M109.007583
[87] Harland R. In situ hybridization: an improved whole-mount method for Xenopus embryos. Methods Cell Biol 1991; 36:685-95; PMID:1811161
[88] Dale L, Howes G, Price BM, Smith JC. Bone morphogenetic protein 4: a ventralizing factor in early Xenopus development. Development 1992; 115:573-85; PMID:1425340
[89] Meno C, Ito Y, Saijoh Y, Matsuda Y, Tashiro K, Kuhara S, Hamada H. Two closely-related left-right asymmetrically expressed genes, lefty-1 and lefty-2: their distinct expression domains, chromosomal linkage and direct neuralizing activity in Xenopus embryos. Genes Cells 1997; 2:513-24; https://doi.org/10.1046/j.1365-2443.1997.1400338.x
[90] Roelink H, Augsburger A, Heemskerk J, Korzh V, Norlin S, Ruiz i Altaba A, Tanabe Y, Placzek M, Edlund T, Jessell TM, et al. Floor plate and motor neuron induction by vhh-1, a vertebrate homolog of hedgehog expressed by the notochord. Cell 1994; 76:761-75; PMID:8124714; https://doi.org/10.1016/0092-8674(94)90514-2
[91] Kelly OG, Melton DA. Development of the pancreas in Xenopus laevis. Dev Dyn 2000; 218:615-27; PMID:10906780; https://doi.org/10.1002/1097-0177(2000)9999:9999%3c::AID-DVDY1027%3e3.0.CO;2-8
[92] Team RC. R: A language and environment for statistical computing. 2013; https://CRAN.R-project.org/doc/FAQ/R-FAQ.html
[93] Fife D. Fife package. R Package Version 1.0 2015; https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/fifer/fifer.pdf