Microfluidic Platform to Study Intercellular
Connectivity Through On-chip Electrical Impedance
Measurement
Joel Dungan¹, Juanita Mathews², Michael Levin², Valencia Koomson¹
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Tufts University, Medford, MA 02155¹
Department of Biology, Tufts University, Medford, MA 02155²

Abstract-A platform has been developed to study
intercellular communication in non-neural cells as it relates
to developmental biology and morphogenetic
bioengineering. The versatile platform uses laminar flow in
a microfluidic channel to create a “sucrose gap" that forces
electrical signaling through a cell monolayer. The
intercellular communication in the cell network is detected
through electrical impedance measurements. A phase
sensitive homodyne system has been designed and
simulated in a 130nm CMOS process to provide a readout
of cell monolayer complex impedance within the device. The
system exhibits a highly linear conversion rate of
0.589mV/kΩ for cell layer impedances up to 1 ΜΩ.
Keywords-CMOS; homodyne; lab-on-a-chip; gap junction

[PAGE 1] I. INTRODUCTION
Non-neural cells possess sophisticated intercellular
communication mechanisms and are capable of forming
networks and making decisions about cell growth and
proliferation [1]. Non-neural cellular communication is
mediated by gap junctions. These close cytosolic couplings
allow the exchange of signaling molecules or ions between
adjacent cells. Gap junctions are comprised of membrane
proteins that can allow diffusion with high specificity [1-3].
Recent results have shown that connectivity between non-neural
cells plays a crucial role in shaping cell development.

Patterns in connectivity established at the cellular level
cascade into complex behaviors important to regenerative
medicine and morphogenetic bioengineering. Altering gap
junction activity has been shown to affect pattern formation [4],
asymmetry [5], and organ growth, going so far as to induce the
formation of multiple heads in planarians [6]. Errors in gap
junction signaling can also cause abnormal growth that
manifests as various disease states in humans, including forms
of cancer [7]. Numerous studies have linked abnormal gap
junction communication with tumor formation and
carcinogenesis, and therapies focusing on gap junction
regulation have met with some success in mouse models [8].
Gap junction-mediated signaling has been shown to affect the
differentiation of multipotent cells [9], and in general, regulation
of these electrical synapses is an essential component of
exploiting developmental bioelectricity for the bioengineering
of artificial living constructs (synthetic morphology) [10-12].

Traditionally, gap junction activity is examined via either the
patch clamping method [13] or by observation of specialized
diffusive dyes [9-11]. Whole cell patch clamping measures gap
junction activity by recording the flow of charged ions through
a cell membrane as an electrical voltage. However, the technique
disrupts the membrane and is both expensive and technically
challenging to perform, especially on more than a single cell.
Dye diffusion methods attach fluorescent indicators to track the
flow of signaling molecules through gap junctions. However, the
results of these dye tests are difficult to quantify and
repeatability is a significant issue.

To overcome the limitations of the existing technologies, a
microfluidic platform is proposed to perform repeatable non-
invasive assays on tissue networks. In a manner analogous to
sucrose bridge experiments [14], the microfluidic chip
electrically isolates a living cell culture, allowing precise
impedance measurements that correspond to the average
connectivity across the cells. This real time monitoring of
cellular connectivity allows closed loop drug delivery studies
that will test training and anticipation in gap junction networks.
The ability to sense and manipulate gap junctional
communication could have profound impacts on research and
applications in developmental biology and tissue engineering.

[PAGE 1] II. MICROFLUIDIC PLATFORM
A. Microfluidic Design
A microfluidic device that miniaturizes sucrose bridge
experiments was presented in [15]. This work extends those
results and incorporates key improvements to realize a true lab-
on-chip research platform. The device takes advantage of the
phenomenon of laminar flow to create three distinct fluid regions
in a central channel, shown in Fig. 1. A sucrose based center
stream creates a high impedance barrier which forces the
majority of electrical signaling through the cell layer above.
Thus, any current stimulus driven between the conductive saline
side streams traverses the cell monolayer producing a recordable
voltage that represents the average electrical impedance across
the cell network.

Digitally controlled solenoid valves allow quick switching
(on order of milliseconds) of the central stream among three high
resistivity sucrose solutions, each which may be perfused with
chemicals agents that induce changes in cell connectivity. This
rapid automated solution exchange enables closed loop drug
delivery experiments, in which drug delivery is modulated
directly in response to electrical measurement of cellular
network connectivity.

A polymethylsiloxane (PDMS) layer forming the top layer
of the microchannels offers several advantages. Importantly, the
device is much less susceptible to leaking because the elastomer
accommodates some non-uniformity in the SU8 film. In addition
to easing fabrication tolerances, the PDMS also allows trapped
bubbles to outgas over time. Cell adhesion to PDMS has proved
exceptional. In the case of normal rat kidney cells, adhesion to
PDMS appears superior to glass and has been successfully
demonstrated under laminar flow conditions for 24 hours.

[PAGE 2] B. Fabrication
The microfluidic chip, as diagrammed in Fig. 1, has been
fabricated in the Tufts Micro/Nanofab. Cr/Au electrodes were
patterned onto a borosilicate substrate using a liftoff process.
The walls of the microfluidic channels were formed using
MicroChem SU8-3050 at a thickness of 65μm. A flat layer of
PDMS (Sylgard 184), mixed at a ratio of 5:1 elastomeric base to
curing agent in order to increase rigidity, forms the top of the
microfluidic channels and serves as a substrate for cell culture.
The layers of the device are compressed together in a custom
housing laser cut from clear acrylic (ePlastics 1/8"). The housing
provides even pressure generated through 6 screws and is
designed to the dimensions of a standard 90 mm petri dish so
that it can be easily mounted on an inverted microscope.

[PAGE 2] C. Electrical Measurement
The device has also been reconfigured to improve the
electrode design and electrical measurement scheme. An
additional set of electrodes have been incorporated to create a
built in control channel. The electrodes have also been routed
(under protective photoresist) to a single edge of the chip where
a good electrical contact can be made via a standard chip edge
connector. The connector routes all signals into a custom printed
circuit board that houses the proposed integrated circuit to
perform electrical impedance measurements.

[PAGE 2] III. INTEGRATED CIRCUIT
A. System Architecture


... (The rest of the content from Extraction 1, starting from "In order to prevent electroplating..." is included verbatim, as it is the most complete version with correctly formatted equations and consistent page numbering.)