[PAGE 1] ENGINEERED MULTICELLULAR CILIATED
ORGANISMS AND KINEMATIC
SELF-REPLICATION THEREOF

ABSTRACT
Disclosed are engineered multicellular organisms. The dis-
closed organisms comprise an aggregate of ciliated cells,
and the organisms move when the ciliated cells are actuated.
The engineered multicellular organisms also are capable of
kinematic self-replication. The engineered multicellular
organisms are capable of moving a plurality of dissociated
ciliated cells into piles of ciliated cells which form a
multicellular organism comprising an aggregate of ciliated
cells which moves when the ciliated cells are actuated. Also
disclosed are systems and methods for designing, preparing,
and utilizing the engineered multicellular organisms.

Multiciliated cells per 500µm region I
20-
Wild Type
NotchICD
Embryo
Explant
Figure 1 (continued)


WT day 5
Ր
WT day 9
J'
NotchICD day 5.
NotchICD day 9
Figure 1 (continued)


K80
40
Average velocity (m/s)
20
4
8
Day (24h average)
Figure 1 (continued)


Brightfield
A)
pre-injury
injury
5m repair
10m repair
15m repair
48h repair
Figure 2


B
Hausdorff
0 = "p
d
d = 37.6
d = 13.0
d = 29.0
d = 12.0
d. = 12.2
Figure 2 (continued)

[PAGE 9] Figure 2 (continued)

[PAGE 10] Figure 2 (continued)

[PAGE 11] Figure 3

[PAGE 12] Figure 3 (continued)

[PAGE 13] Figure 4

No text content to extract from the provided pages. These pages appear to contain only images (figures) and associated labels, which are excluded according to the instructions.

[PAGE 17] Figure 5 (continued)

[PAGE 17] Figure 6

[PAGE 18] Figure 7

[PAGE 19] Figure 8

[PAGE 20] Figure 9

[PAGE 21] Figure 9

[PAGE 22] Figure 10

[PAGE 23] Figure 11

[PAGE 24] Figure 12

[PAGE 25] Figure 13

[PAGE 26] Figure 15
self replication star
voxel legend
Mature ciliated celis
atach
develop

[PAGE 27] Figure 16
Deepgreen
Node
3
Node
2
Node
10
evolutionary
trial 10
GPU
8
GPU
9
GPU
10
voxcraft
simulation
Processor
9
Processor
10-1
Processor
10-2
evolutionary trial 1

[PAGE 28] Figure 17
3
2
1
0
Filial
generations
B
FG: 3.83 FG: 2.79 FO:2.73 FO: 2.92 FG: 2.93 FG: 3.32 FG: 3.5
shapes
FG: 3.32 FG: 2.67 FG: 2.39 FO: 293 FG 2.95 FG:2.88 FG.2.83
FG: 2.81 FG: 2.6 FG: 3.15 FG:2.41 FG:2.86 FG:2.51 FG: 2.82
FG: 2.94 FG: 2.79 FG: 263 FG 281 FG:268 FG345 FG: 35
FG: 2.5 FG: 2.71 FG2.77 FG:2.81 FG: 3.12
FG: 3.5 FG: 2.51
FG: 2.97 FG: 3.51 FG: 2.66 FO: 2.93 FG: 2.66 FG: 3.41 FG: 2.63
1000 2000 3000 4000 5000
Designs evaluated
FG: 2.95 FG: 3.4 FG: 3.15 FO: 2.72 FG: 2.88 FG: 2.79 FG: 2.79

[PAGE 29] 

Figure 17

[PAGE 30] 

Figure 18

[PAGE 31] 

Figure 19

[PAGE 32] 

Figure 20

[PAGE 33] 

Figure 21

[PAGE 4] ENGINEERED MULTICELLULAR CILIATED
ORGANISMS AND KINEMATIC
SELF-REPLICATION THEREOF
CROSS-REFERENCE TO RELATED PATENT
APPLICATIONS

[0001] The present application is a continuation of U.S.
application Ser. No. 17/647,847, filed Jan. 12, 2022, which
claims the benefit of priority under 35 U.S.C. § 119 (e) to
U.S. Provisional Application No. 63/136,564, filed on Jan.
12, 2021, and U.S. Provisional Application No. 63/261,258,
filed on Sep. 15, 2021. The contents of which are incorpo-
rated herein by reference in their entireties.

STATEMENT REGARDING FEDERALLY
SPONSORED RESEARCH OR DEVELOPMENT

[0002] This invention was made with government support
under grant HR0011-18-2-0022 awarded by the Department
of Defense. The government has certain rights in the inven-
tion.

BACKGROUND

[0003] The field of the invention relates to engineered
multicellular organisms and systems and methods for
designing, preparing, and utilizing engineered multicellular
organisms. The engineered multicellular organisms may be
configured for movement and other physical and biological
activities.

[0004] Here, we introduce "Xenobots," which are multi-
cellular biological robots ("biobots") from frog (Xenopus
laevis) with a diameter ranging from 100 to 500 microns.
Xenobots have a built-in capacity for motility in aqueous
environments based on locomotive appendages called
"cilia" which cover their surface. Xenobots are induced to
arise by cellular self-organization and do not require scaf-
folds or microprinting, and the amphibian cells which form
Xenobots are highly amenable to surgical, genetic, chemi-
cal, and optical stimulation to control the self-assembly
process. Xenobots are motile and are capable of moving in
various trajectories including loops, straight lines, large arcs,
and even in zigzag patterns with a linear speed ranges from
5-50 microns/second.

[0005] Because Xenobots develop on their own without
the need for external manipulation or micromanagement,
many of them can be grown in parallel. This makes Xeno-
bots amenable to easy mass fabrication, which not only
makes their production more scalable and economical, but
also enables easy generation of Xenobots swarms that may
collectively accomplish task that cannot be accomplished by
a single Xenobot. Furthermore, Xenobots can be loaded with
exogenous payloads such as RNA, protein, drugs, dyes, and
synthetic molecules. Therefore, Xenobots can be pro-
grammed on demand to execute a diverse set of tasks in
different environments.

[0006] Recently, we have found that semitoroidal shaped
("Pac Man" shape) xenobots are capable of kinematic self
replication. We also found that xenobots can push individual
frog cells into piles. The cells in these piles attach together
and grow cilia-small motion-propelling hairs on the pile's
outer face.

[0007] Making functional self copies of oneself by amass-
ing and organizing external material through motion is
known as kinematic self replication. This differs from
growth-based replication, the standard form of propagation
in biology.

[0008] We have observed that a swarm of semitoroids can
trigger five rounds of this replicative process before losing
the ability to self-replicate, if supplied with enough frog
cells as construction material. It should be possible to keep
this process going indefinitely if sufficient quantities of cells
are provided. Further, starting with just a few starter semi-
toroids, a very large number of xenobots can be created
automatically, thus classing this technology as an exponen-
tial technology. We have shown that, in theory, these swarms
are capable of performing exponentially increasing amounts
of useful work at the microscale, such as building and fixing
microelectronics, or cleaning contaminants from soils and
waterways.

[PAGE 4] SUMMARY

[0009] Disclosed are engineered multicellular organisms.
The disclosed organisms comprise or consist of relatively
small aggregates of ciliated cells, and the organisms move
when the ciliated cells are actuated.

[0010] The engineered multicellular organisms also are
capable of kinematic self-replication. The engineered mul-
ticellular organisms are capable of moving a plurality of
dissociated ciliated cells into piles of ciliated cells which
form a multicellular organism comprising an aggregate of
ciliated cells which moves when the ciliated cells are
actuated. Also disclosed are systems and methods for
designing, preparing, and utilizing the engineered multicel-
lular organisms.

[PAGE 4] BRIEF DESCRIPTION OF THE FIGURES


[PAGE 5] 
[0017] FIG. 7. Xenobot lifespan can be extended with
nutrient rich media. Reared in standard 0.75×MMR, Xeno-
bots live an average of 10 days post excision, metabolizing
yolk platelets maternally loaded into the embryo. However,
this lifespan can be extended for a period of months (A-F)
with the addition of nutrient rich culture media. Under these
conditions, Xenobots gradually lose pigmentation and
become transparent, similar to the epidermis of a developing
tadpole tailfin (G-I). Scale bars indicate 500 μm.

[0018] FIG. 8. Spontaneous kinematic self replication. (A)
Stem cells are removed from early stage frog blastula,
dissociated, and placed in a saline solution where they
cohere into spheres containing ~3000 cells. The spheres
develop cilia on their outer surfaces after 3 days. When the
resulting mature swarm is placed amid ~60,000 dissociated
stem cells in a 60 mm-diameter circular dish (B), their
collective motion pushes some cells together into piles
(C,D), which, if sufficiently large (at least 50 cells), develop
into ciliated offspring (E) themselves capable of swimming,
and, if provided additional dissociated stem cells (F), build
additional offspring. In short, progenitors (p) build offspring
(o), which then become progenitors. This process can be
disrupted by withholding additional dissociated cells. Under
these, the currently best known environmental conditions,
the system naturally self replicates for a maximum of two
rounds before halting. The probability of halting (a) or
replicating (1-a) depends on a temperature range suitable for
frog embryos, the concentration of dissociated cells, the
number and stochastic behavior of the mature organisms, the
viscosity of the solution, the geometry of the dish's surface,
and the possibility of contamination. Scale bars indicate 500
microns.

[0019] FIG. 9. Amplifying kinematic self replication. Due
to surface tension, reconfigurable organisms naturally
develop into ciliated spheroids, but they can be sculpted into
non spheroidal morphologies manually during development
to realize more complex body shapes. Progenitor shapes
were evolved in silico to maximize the number of self
replication rounds before halting. (A) Shapes often converge
to an asymmetrical semitoroid (C-shape; pink) with a single
narrow mouth in which dissociated cells (green) can be
captured, transported, and aggregated. This evolved shape
was fabricated and released in vivo (B), recapitulating the
behavior observed in silico (A). Offspring built by wild type
spheroids (C) were smaller than those built by the semitor-
oids (D), regardless of the size and aspect ratios of the
spheroids, and across different concentrations of dissociated
cells (E). The maximum of two rounds of self-replication
achieved by the spheroids (F) was extended by the semitor-
oids to a maximum of four rounds (G). Scale bars indicate
500 microns.

[0020] FIG. 10. Evolving self-replication. (A) An evolu-
tionary algorithm, starting with random swarms, evolves
swarms with increasing self replicative ability. (FG-number
of filial generations achieved by a given swarm. The frac-
tional part denotes how close the swarm got to achieving
another replication round.) The most successful lineage in
this evolutionary trial originated from a spheroid that built

after 48 h of healing. In all cases, individuals were capable
of closing the wound and resolving the injury. (B) To
quantify repair, images were first binarized using edge
detection software. The resulting images were passed
though Harsdorf distance software, comparing the pre-injury
state with proceeding timepoints. (C) All repair time points
showed significant improvement over that of the initial
injury. Repeated measures ANOVA followed by Dunnett's
post-hoc comparisons. Error bars indicate ±1 SD.

[0013] FIG. 3. Xenobots can record experience using a
photoconvertible fluorescent reporter. (A) Xenobots injected
with mRNA encoding the protein EosFP emit strong green
fluorescence at five days of development. This signal per-
manently photo-converts to red when exposed to 390 nm
light (B) due to an irreversible break in the backbone of the
chromophore. (C) Using this reporter, Xenobots were intro-
duced into a 5 cm arena containing an illuminated spot 7 mm
in diameter. After exploring the environment for 1 hour, the
individuals were collected and housed in a 14° C. incubator.
(D,E) Two days later, fluorescent imaging revealed which
Xenobots moved through the blue light during their explo-
ration of the dish.

[0014] FIG. 4. Xenobots navigate diverse environments.
(A) Xenobots were released into an open field with debris
composed of carmine dye particles. Similar to prior obser-
vations, individuals demonstrate a variety of movement
types, from linear motion to elliptical tracks. (B) In large
mazes, individuals follow channels provided by the envi-
ronment. (C) Narrow mazes begin to restrict rotational
movement, resulting in individuals following edges in the
arena. (D) In a narrow glass capillary with a 0.58 mm inner
diameter, individuals can traverse the length of the tunnel
and emerge from the opposite end.

[0015] FIG. 5. Modeling collective behavior. (A) Six
living Xenobots were released into an arena covered in 5-10
µM silicone coated iron oxide beads. (B) After 12 h, the
living Xenobots cleared regions of the arena, creating piles
of particles across the environment (B'). (C) Five simulated
Xenobots (green) were initially placed within a 35×35 grid
of particulate matter (red) and collectively evolved in silico
as a swarm to recapitulate a specific behavior observed in
vivo: pile making ((C') Expanded inset). (D) The Xenobots
were identically shaped and propelled with open-loop con-
trol (no sensors were included) according to an initially
random set of static cilia forces. (E) The simulated Xenobots
were "blind" but nevertheless, after 500 generations of
evolution in silico, the simulated swarm exhibited dynamic
coupling, complex movement trajectories, and herding
behavior by pushing the initially separated debris into cen-
tral piles. (F) The body shape of five simulated Xenobots (F';
green) was evolved in silico to aggregate particulate matter.
Each individual Xenobot in the swarm shares the same
evolved morphology but has its own evolved cilia controller.
The living Xenobots in this paper have spherical bodies, but
can be sculpted to match the computer-designed blueprint
(F"). (G) It remains to be determined if the behavior of a
swarm of computer-designed Xenobots would match the
predicted behavior.

[0016] FIG. 6. Ectoderm derived Xenobots do not contain
neural tissue. Small (A, A') and large (B, B') Xenobots were
fixed, bisected, and processed with anti-acetylated tubulin
immunohistochemistry. Visualization of the fluorescent sec-
ondary reveals the presence of multiciliated cells along the
surface of the Xenobot, but no neurons were present exter-
nally or internally (n=24). Similarly, young tadpoles also
possess multiciliated cells across the epidermis of their tail
(C) and trunk (C'). However, in the case of tadpoles, motor
axons are present between the somites and peripheral nerves
are observed throughout the fin tissue. Scale bars indicate
250 µm.

[0017] FIG. 7. Xenobot lifespan can be extended with
nutrient rich media. Reared in standard 0.75×MMR, Xeno-
bots live an average of 10 days post excision, metabolizing
yolk platelets maternally loaded into the embryo. However,
this lifespan can be extended for a period of months (A-F)
with the addition of nutrient rich culture media. Under these
conditions, Xenobots gradually lose pigmentation and
become transparent, similar to the epidermis of a developing
tadpole tailfin (G-I). Scale bars indicate 500 μm.

[0018] FIG. 8. Spontaneous kinematic self replication. (A)
Stem cells are removed from early stage frog blastula,
dissociated, and placed in a saline solution where they
cohere into spheres containing ~3000 cells. The spheres
develop cilia on their outer surfaces after 3 days. When the
resulting mature swarm is placed amid ~60,000 dissociated
stem cells in a 60 mm-diameter circular dish (B), their
collective motion pushes some cells together into piles
(C,D), which, if sufficiently large (at least 50 cells), develop
into ciliated offspring (E) themselves capable of swimming,
and, if provided additional dissociated stem cells (F), build
additional offspring. In short, progenitors (p) build offspring
(o), which then become progenitors. This process can be
disrupted by withholding additional dissociated cells. Under
these, the currently best known environmental conditions,
the system naturally self replicates for a maximum of two
rounds before halting. The probability of halting (a) or
replicating (1-a) depends on a temperature range suitable for
frog embryos, the concentration of dissociated cells, the
number and stochastic behavior of the mature organisms, the
viscosity of the solution, the geometry of the dish's surface,
and the possibility of contamination. Scale bars indicate 500
microns.

[0019] FIG. 9. Amplifying kinematic self replication. Due
to surface tension, reconfigurable organisms naturally
develop into ciliated spheroids, but they can be sculpted into
non spheroidal morphologies manually during development
to realize more complex body shapes. Progenitor shapes
were evolved in silico to maximize the number of self
replication rounds before halting. (A) Shapes often converge
to an asymmetrical semitoroid (C-shape; pink) with a single
narrow mouth in which dissociated cells (green) can be
captured, transported, and aggregated. This evolved shape
was fabricated and released in vivo (B), recapitulating the
behavior observed in silico (A). Offspring built by wild type
spheroids (C) were smaller than those built by the semitor-
oids (D), regardless of the size and aspect ratios of the
spheroids, and across different concentrations of dissociated
cells (E). The maximum of two rounds of self-replication
achieved by the spheroids (F) was extended by the semitor-
oids to a maximum of four rounds (G). Scale bars indicate
500 microns.

[0020] FIG. 10. Evolving self-replication. (A) An evolu-
tionary algorithm, starting with random swarms, evolves
swarms with increasing self replicative ability. (FG-number
of filial generations achieved by a given swarm. The frac-
tional part denotes how close the swarm got to achieving
another replication round.) The most successful lineage in
this evolutionary trial originated from a spheroid that built

[PAGE 3] DETAILED DESCRIPTION

[0034] The following discussion is presented to enable a
person skilled in the art to make and use embodiments of the
disclosure. Various modifications to the illustrated embodi-
ments will be readily apparent to those skilled in the art, and
the generic principles herein can be applied to other embodi-
ments and applications without departing from embodi-
ments of the disclosure. Thus, embodiments of the disclo-
sure are not intended to be limited to embodiments shown,
but are to be accorded the widest scope consistent with the
principles and features disclosed herein. The following
detailed description is to be read with reference to the
figures. The figures, which are not necessarily to scale,
depict selected embodiments and are not intended to limit
the scope of embodiments of the disclosure. Skilled artisans
will recognize the examples provided herein have many
useful alternatives and fall within the scope of embodiments
of the disclosure.

US 2025/0145944 A1
6
May 8, 2025
cells, rat cells, and the like). Suitable cells may include cells
that have been cultured in vitro.
[0053] The aggregate of cells may comprise, consist
essentially of, or consist of ciliated cells. In some embodi-
ments, the aggregate of cells may comprise or may not
comprise additional non-ciliated cell types.
[0054] In some embodiments, the engineered multicellular
organisms are non-innervated (e.g., the organisms do not
comprise neural cells or neural tissue) and/or or non-carti-
laginous. The multicellular organisms may be described as
"engineered" because they are different from naturally
occurring organism that arise without the guidance of human
ingenuity and modifications. In other words, the multicel-
lular organisms are synthetic and non-naturally occurring,
albeit the multicellular organism may utilize endogenous
cell: cell signaling and morphogenesis.
[0055] The aggregate of cells of the engineered multicel-
lular organisms may comprise cells that have been engi-
neered to express a heterologous molecule. In some embodi-
ments, the cells of the organisms are engineered to express
a heterologous protein or secrete specific desired molecules.
[0056] In embodiments in which the aggregate of cells
comprises cells that have been engineered to express a
heterologous molecule, suitable heterologous molecules that
are expressed may include enzymes. Suitable enzymes may
include enzymes that metabolize a target substrate, which
may include toxins. Other suitable heterologous molecules
may include receptors for a target ligand (e.g., a target ligand
sensed by the organism), or sensors of light, heat, and other
physical properties in the environment. Other suitable het-
erologous molecules may include reporter molecules (e.g.,
photoconvertible fluorescent reporter molecules).
[0057] The disclosed engineered multicellular organisms
may be self-repairing. In some embodiments, if the aggre-
gate of cells is subjected to deaggregation (e.g., physical
damage that disrupts aggregation of the cells), the cells will
reaggregate and/or remodel to re-form the aggregate of cells
having the original shape or a new shape.
[0058] The engineered multicellular organisms may be
configured in order to perform tasks. For example, the
engineered multicellular organisms may be configured
structurally and/or genetically.
[0059] In some embodiments, the organism is configured
for moving a target object (e.g., by pushing a target object).
In further embodiments, the organism is configured for
moving target objects (e.g., by pushing target objects) and
collecting the moved target objections (i.e., aggregating the
target objects).
[0060] The engineered multicellular organisms may be
configured to have a cavity. In some embodiments, the
engineered multicellular organisms are configured to have a
cavity for capturing and/or transporting a target object.
[0061] The engineered multicellular organisms may be
utilized in a number of applications. In some embodiments,
the engineered multicellular organisms are utilized in meth-
ods for removing a target substrate from an environment
(e.g., a toxin from an environment). The methods may
comprise engineering the organisms to express an enzyme
that metabolizes the target substrate and placing the organ-
ism in the environment to remove the target substrate from
the environment.
[0062] In other embodiments, the engineered multicellular
organisms are utilized in methods for detecting a target
ligand in a sample. The methods may comprise engineering
the organisms to express a receptor for the target ligand and
place the organism in the sample, where the organism
generates a signal after the receptor binds the target ligand.
[0063] In other embodiments, the engineered multicellular
organisms may express a photoconvertible fluorescent
reporter molecule, and the organism generates a fluorescent
signal when the photoconvertible fluorescent reporter mol-
ecule is exposed to light. As such, the activity and movement
of the organisms may be monitored by placing the organisms
in an environment and providing a light source for activating
the photoconvertible fluorescent reporter molecule.
[0064] Also disclosed are methods for preparing the engi-
neered multicellular organisms. In some embodiments, the
methods comprising explanting cells from tissue and cul-
turing the explanted cells under conditions in which the
cultured, explanted cells form the engineered multicellular
organisms.

[PAGE 6] Illustrative Embodiments
[0065] The following embodiments are illustrative and
should not be interpreted to limit the scope of the claimed
subject matter.
[0066] Embodiment 1. An engineered multicellular organ-
ism comprising an aggregate of ciliated cells, wherein the
organism moves when the ciliated cells are actuated.
[0067] Embodiment 2. The organism of embodiment 1,
wherein the organism consists of biological material and/or
does not comprise any inorganic material, for example as a
scaffold.
[0068] Embodiment 3. The organism of embodiment 1 or
2, wherein the organism comprises a sensor for detecting a
target molecule.
[0069] Embodiment 4. The organism of any of the fore-
going embodiments, wherein the cells of the organism
self-assemble.
[0070] Embodiment 5. The organism of any of the fore-
going embodiments, wherein the organism has an effective
diameter of about 100-500 microns.
[0071] Embodiment 6. The organism of any of the fore-
going embodiments, wherein the organism moves at a rate of
at least about 15, 20, 25, 50, 100, 200, 500, or 1000
microns/second when the ciliated cells are actuated.
[0072] Embodiment 7. The organism of any of the fore-
going embodiments, wherein the organism does not com-
prise neural cells or neural tissue.
[0073] Embodiment 8. The organism of any of the fore-
going embodiments, wherein the ciliated cells are eukaryotic
epidermal cells.
[0074] Embodiment 9. The organism of any of the fore-
going embodiments, wherein the ciliated cells are engi-
neered to express a heterologous molecule.
[0075] Embodiment 10. The organism of embodiment 9,
wherein the heterologous molecule is a reporter molecule
(e.g., a photoconvertible fluorescent reporter molecule).
[0076] Embodiment 11. The organism of embodiment 9,
wherein the heterologous molecule is an enzyme that
metabolizes a target substrate (e.g., a toxin).
[0077] Embodiment 12. The organism of embodiment 9,
wherein the heterologous molecule is a receptor for a target
ligand (e.g., a target ligand sensed by the organism).
[0078] Embodiment 13. The organism of any of the fore-
going embodiments, wherein the aggregate of cells reaggre-
gates after the aggregate is subjected to deaggregation (i.e.,
the organism self-repairs).
[0079] Embodiment 14. The organism of any of the fore-
going embodiments, wherein the organism is configured for
moving a target object, optionally wherein the organism
comprises a hole or cavity for holding the target object.
[0080] Embodiment 15. The organism of any of the fore-
going embodiments, wherein the organism is configured to
have a cavity for capturing and/or transporting a target
object.
[0081] Embodiment 16. The organism of any of the fore-
going embodiments, wherein the organism comprises
amphibian cells.
[0082] Embodiment 17. A plurality of the organism of any
of the foregoing embodiments, wherein the plurality exhibits
collective and/or coordinated behavior.
[0083] Embodiment 18. The plurality of embodiment 17,
wherein the collective and/or coordinated behavior is col-
lective and/or coordinated movement.
[0084] Embodiment 19. A method for removing a target
substrate from an environment, the method comprising
engineering the organism of any of embodiments 1-18 or a
plurality thereof to express an enzyme that metabolizes the
target substrate and placing the organism in the environ-
ment.
[0085] Embodiment 20. A method for detecting a target
ligand in a sample, the method comprising engineering the
organism of any of embodiments 1-18 or plurality thereof to
express a receptor for the target ligand and place the
organism in the sample, wherein the organism generates a
signal after the receptor binds the target ligand.
[0086] Embodiment 21. A method for detecting movement
of an organism of any of embodiments 1-17 or a plurality
thereof, wherein the organism or the plurality thereof
expresses a photoconvertible fluorescent reporter molecule,
and the organism generates a fluorescent signal when the
photoconvertible fluorescent reporter molecule is exposed to
light.
[0087] Embodiment 22. A method for preparing the engi-
neered multicellular organism of any of embodiments 1-17
or a plurality thereof, the method comprising explanting
cells from tissue and culturing the explanted cells under
conditions in which the cultured, explanted cells form the
engineered multicellular organism or the plurality thereof.
[PAGE 8] EXAMPLES
[0110] The following examples are illustrative and should
not be interpreted to limit the scope of the claimed subject
matter.

[PAGE 8] Example 1-a Cellular Platform for the
Development of Synthetic Living Machines
[0111] Reference is made to Blackiston et al., "A cellular
platform for the development of synthetic living machines,"
Sci. Robot. 2021 Mar. 31; 6 (52): eabf1571. doi: 10.1126/
scirobotics.abf1571, the content of which is incorporated
herein by reference in its entirety.

[PAGE 8] Title a New Cellular Platform for the Development of
Synthetic Living Machines
[0112] Robot swarms have to date been constructed from
artificial materials. Motile biological constructs have been
created from muscle cells grown on precisely shaped scaf-
folds. However, the exploitation of emergent self-organiza-
tion and functional plasticity into a self-directed living
machine has remained a major challenge. We report here an
explant-based method for generation of in vitro biological
robots from frog (Xenopus laevis) cells. These Xenobots
exhibit coordinated locomotion via cilia present on their
surface. These cilia arise through normal tissue patterning
and do not require complicated construction methods or
genomic editing, making biobot production amenable to
high-throughput projects. The biobots arise by cellular self-
organization and do not require scaffolds or microprinting;
the amphibian cells are highly amenable to surgical, genetic,
chemical, and optical stimulation during the self-assembly
process. We show that the Xenobots can navigate aqueous
environments in diverse ways, heal after damage, and show
emergent group behaviors. We provide in silico simulations
using evolutionary computation that explain how sensor-less
behavior of Xenobots gives rise to observed manipulation of
objects in their environment. In addition, we provide proof
of principle for a writable molecular memory using a
photoconvertible protein which can record exposure to a
specific wavelength of light. Together, these results intro-
duce a new platform that can be used to study many aspects
of self-assembly, swarm behavior, and synthetic bioengi-
neering, as well as provide versatile, soft-body living
machines for numerous practical applications in biomedi-
cine and the environment.

[PAGE 8] Introduction
[0113] Constructing robot swarms at small scales remains
an open problem (1-4). Fabrication challenges abound, yet
manufacturing advances are allowing for the construction of
large numbers of microrobots composed of diverse compo-
nents (5-7). Formulating and programming complex control
policies into very small devices to enable swarm behavior
also raises many conceptual challenges (8-10). However,
recent advances in synthetic biology suggest an alternative
path to many-bodied microswarms that, to some degree,
sidestep some of these manufacturing and conceptual chal-
lenges: constructing small-scale living machines solely from
biological tissue (11) in such a way that they inherit the
adaptive potential of their wild type analogs. All organisms,
including those that grow to macro size scales, pass through
early stages of development in which they must achieve and
maintain complex behaviors. This raises the possibility of
direct and indirect perturbations to natural development,
including tissue explantation and/or rearrangement, to
achieve novel yet stable small-scale biological forms
orthogonal to any found in nature. One major advantage of
this approach is that living cells already possess numerous
sensors, effectors, and signaling/computational circuits.
Their native biochemical, biomechanical, and bioelectrical
communication and control machinery can be repurposed
for novel functionality at the system level and does not have
to be directly engineered.
[0114] Classical developmental biology has long focused
on uncovering the genes, organizing centers, and signaling
cascades that drive specification of cells and tissues from
undifferentiated precursors (12, 13). Historically, this
research used in vivo embryonic models to examine the
effects of misexpression of early patterning genes on down-
stream phenotypes, creating morphological and molecular
fate maps in their respective native systems (14-19). A more
recent effort has been directed towards harnessing the infor-
mation garnered from this classical basic biology to create
complex systems from the ground up in vitro. These bio-
logical robots allow investigation into diverse topics ranging
from the origin of multicellularity, aspects of basal cogni-
tion, new approaches to synthetic biology, and the creation
of implantable bio-prosthetics.
[0115] A recognizable example of this methodology are
organoids, 3-dimensional in vitro cultured representations of
complex tissues and organs that reproduce the physiology of
their in vivo counterparts. Indeed, this work has revealed
many mechanisms of stem cell differentiation, and has
enabled investigators to drive progenitor cells to a wide
array of complex tissue types with diverse anatomies includ-
ing components of the eye, cerebral structures, gut, liver,
intestine, mammary gland, kidney, and pancreas among
others (20). Furthermore, recent advances led the to the
miniaturization and daisy-chaining of multiple organoid
types, leading to body-on-a-chip systems aimed at recapitu-
lating whole-organism nested physiology (21, 22). The
power of this technology enables investigators to model
complex multi-organ diseases, understand drug interactions
between organ systems, and better represent patient physi-
ology compared to single organoids grown in culture. How-
ever, while these techniques further our understanding of
many aspects of differentiation and self-assembly, they are
designed to replicate existing in vivo systems rather than
building novel morphologies. Moreover, they are largely
produced by micromanaging (via bio-printing or scaffolds)
cellular arrangement, and have yet to truly exploit the
remarkable self-assembly and plasticity of cells in vivo (23).
Similarly, they have not yet been explored for the ability to
exhibit motility and interaction with changing environments.
This important advance would enable the extension of
physiological and biomedical studies into the emerging field
of basal cognition which seeks to address the origin of
computation, decision-making, and adaptive control in
diverse body-plans. Developing amenable platforms for
addressing this question is as crucial for understanding the
evolution of brain-body complexity as they are for providing
insight and biological inspiration for robotics and artificial
intelligence.
[PAGE 9] [0116] Creation of novel biological forms and structures
non-existent in nature is the goal of the emerging field of
biorobotics. So far, efforts in this field have somewhat
coalesced around biohybrid designs, combining synthetic
scaffolds or components alongside living cells and tissues.
These systems often use muscle actuators to drive rigid
artificial body-parts, as in the case of phototaxis guided
biohybrid stingray (24), micro walking and swimming
biohybrids propelled by skeletal and cardiac muscle tissue
(25, 26), and macroscale sea turtle like Aplysia biohybrid
(27). This design approach capitalizes on the benefits of
traditional robotics; synthetic components can be modeled
quickly in simulation, adjusted, and fabricated with a high
degree of precision. It also enables the creation of morpholo-
gies which would be difficult or impossible to produce with
living tissues, including micrometer thin sheets with high
rigidity, thin filaments resistant to breaking, and sharp edges.
However, these synthetic components also contain the limi-
tations of traditional robotic systems-they are unable to
regenerate or self-repair, they do not possess metabolic
pathways, and are generally unable undergo extensive
remodeling or migration like living cells and tissues.
[0117] Instead of relying on synthetic components that
specify the types of function the robot can accomplish, one
could take advantage of the plasticity biology has to offer
and build designs entirely out of cells and tissues, creating
a fully biological machine (11). By using a combination of
epidermal and cardiac muscle tissue, one can create biobots
that can crawl through aqueous environments, collect debris
in their immediate vicinity, and quickly heal from mechani-
cal lacerations. While less precise in their functionality
compared to biohybrids, the biobots are robust to damage
and can respond to changes in their environment. These
constructs are also completely self-powered, surviving ten
days without additional nutrients, and are fully biodegrad-
able, harmlessly breaking down at their end of life.
[0118] The current study expands on these fully biological
machines, documenting a bottom up approach to produce
synthetic living machines from cells of the frog Xenopus
laevis. We hypothesized that when liberated from the rest of
the animal, cells would self-organize into a functional mor-
phology that was distinct from their genomically-specified
default. We report here that tissue explanted from wild-type
frog embryos forms synthetic constructs with fascinating
morphology and behavior that are different from that of
normal tadpoles. These "Xenobots" generate swimming
motion through the beating of multiciliated cells present on
their surface (repurposing machinery whose normal function
is to distribute mucus and flow pathogens and other material
off the skin). As opposed to imposing tissue placement and
shape from the top down (11), the design method presented
here uses whole explants from developing frog embryos.
While these explants, known as animal caps, have been used
for decades to understand the early patterning events of
epidermal and neural cell lineages (28-31), they have not
been examined for behavioral capacity as proto-organisms,
or used to create novel living machines with specific func-
tions.
[0119] Here we report the use of Xenopus animal cells for
generating swimming automata capable of locomoting
through a variety of environments. In addition to categoriz-
ing their lifecycle, behavior, and regenerative capacity, we
also document the ability to introduce simple read-write
functionality via RNA encoded photoconvertible proteins,
serving as a proof of principle that experiences can be
encoded as a molecular memory and retrieved at a later time.
We use computational modeling to explain their multi-scale
behaviors and effects on their environment. These findings
demonstrate that novel behaviors can be elicited from bio-
bots, and that they also inherit useful behaviors exhibited by
many organisms, such as robustness to damage, and a
spontaneous drive to exhibit collective behavior. This may,
in future, make coaxing desired collective behaviors from
biobot swarms more straightforward than programming
equivalent behaviors into swarms of microrobots. Together,
these results contribute to a new field at the intersection of
synthetic biology and developmental biology and represent
a new bottom-up method to produce simple biological
machines.

[PAGE 9] Methods
[0120] We here survey the stages of the biological con-
struction process (sects. m1-m8), computational design of
simulated biobots to exhibit a representative collective
behavior (sect. m9), and analysis of the distinct behaviors
exhibited by a physical swarm of biobots performing this
behavior (sect. m10).
[0121] m1: Animal Husbandry. All experiments were con-
ducted using fertilized Xenopus laevis embryos as donor
tissue. Wild type embryos were collected 30 minutes post
fertilization and reared in 0.1× Marcs Modified Ringer
solution (MMR), pH 7.8, at 14° C. prior to microinjection or
animal cap dissection. Experimental procedures using ani-
mals for experimental purposes were approved by the Insti-
tutional Animal Care and Use Committee and Tufts Univer-
sity Department of Laboratory Animal Medicine under
protocol number M2020-35.
[0122] m2: Explant culture. Xenopus animal cap explants
were performed using standard methods (32). Briefly, fer-
tilized embryos were raised at 14° C. in 0.1×MMR (pH 7.8),
until Neiuwkoop and Faber stage 9. The vitelline membrane
of each embryo was removed with surgical forceps (Du-
mont, 11241-30 #4) before being transferred to a 1% agarose
lined petri dish containing 0.75×MMR for excision. Surgical
forceps were then used to remove a circular mass of tissue
from the animal-most region of each blastula embryo, after
which the remainder of the embryo was removed from the
dish. Each explant was then inverted and allowed to heal for
30 minutes to 1 hour in 0.75×MMR, allowing the tissue to
ball up into a spherical mass. After healing, all the explants
from each treatment were transferred to new 1% agarose
covered dishes containing 10 ml 0.75×MMR and 5 ng/µl
gentamicin and cultured at 14° C. until ready for use. Media
was replaced three time a week to clean out cellular debris
and any possible contamination.
[0123] For long term growth studies extending beyond the
normal 10-day lifespan, explants were raised in Xenopus cell
culture media containing 50% Ringer's solution, 49% Lei-
bovitz L-15 Medium (ThermoFisher 11415064), and 1%
fetal bovine serum. Explants were placed into individual
wells of a 24-well plate lined with 2% agarose and were fed
with 1 m1 of culture media and 5 ng/µl gentamicin. Explants
were moved to new wells with fresh media three times per
week to reduce the likelihood of fungal contamination.
[0124] In experiments using the K+ inhibitor/Ca2+ acti-
vator barium chloride, Xenobots were exposed a 2.0 mM
solution in 0.75×MMR beginning 3-4 hours after excision/
healing and kept in the solutions throughout the remainder
[PAGE 10] of the study. All pharmaceuticals were stored as stocks at 4°
C. and working solutions were refreshed every three days.
[0125] m3: Microinjection. All mRNA was synthesized
using standard message machine kits (Life Technologies)
and stored at -80° C. until used. Prior to injection, cohorts
of 4 cell stage embryos were transferred to a 3% Ficoll
solution and aligned in a laser etched Petri dish. Individual
embryos were then injected into each of the 4 cells using a
pulled capillary to deliver approximately 500 ng of RNA in
a 50 nL volume to each cell. Four cell embryos were chosen
for injection over one cell due to the observation that
expression tended to be more uniform at the 4-cell stage.
Two hours after microinjection the embryos were washed
twice in 0.1×MMR (pH 7.8), moved to new Petri dishes, and
moved to a 22° C. incubator overnight. The following
morning, the embryos were cleaned one final time before
processing for animal cap excision. Constructs used in the
current study included the multi-ciliated cell inhibitor
Notch-ICD (33, 34) and EosFP (35).
[0126] m4: Immunohistochemistry. Multi-ciliated cell
number was visualized through immunohistochemistry with
the monoclonal anti-acetylated alpha tubulin antibody
(Sigma T7451) using a protocol described previously (36).
Cohorts of Xenobots from each treatment were pooled and
transferred to a 3 ml scintillation vial containing MEMFA
fixative (100 mM MOPS (pH 7.4), 2 mM EGTA, 1 mM
MgSO4, 3.7% (v/v) formaldehyde). Fixation proceeded for
2H at room temperature on a nutator, after which the fixative
was removed with a disposable pipette and the Xenobots
were washed three times, ten minutes per wash, in phosphate
buffered saline+0.1% Tween 20 (PBST) and stored at 4° С.
until ready for processing. Processing began by blocking for
1H at room temperature with 10% goat serum in PBST.
Samples were then rocked overnight at 4° C. in monoclonal
anti-acetylated alpha tubulin antibody diluted 1:1000 in
PBST+10% goat serum. Following primary incubation,
samples were washed three times for 15 min in PBST before
60 min secondary incubation with AlexaFluor-555 conju-
gated secondary at 1:500 dilution in PBST. Following sec-
ondary incubation, samples were washed three times for 15
min in PBST.
[0127] m5: Behavioral analysis. Mazes used in behavioral
tests were created from acrylic negatives and cast with 2%
agarose. Each negative was affixed to the lid of a petri dish
with a spot of cyanoacrylate-based adhesive and lowered
into a dish containing sufficient volume of melted agarose to
submerge the maze one half of its total height. Dishes cooled
at room temperature for 1 hour before being wrapped in
Parafilm and stored at 4° C. until use. For glass capillary
experiments, standard 1.0 mm OD, 0.5 mm ID, 4-inch length
capillaries (Sutter Instruments BF100-50-10) were cut down
to a 2 cm length using a diamond knife. Individual Xenobots
were then manually loaded into one end of the capillary and
observed for 10 minutes on a stereoscope with an attached
Sony IMX234 camera. In cases where movement was
observed moving out of the loading area (i.e. the opposite
direction of the preferred movement), the individual was
rotated 180 degrees and reloaded in the same manner. Trials
were considered a success if the individual emerged from the
opposite end of the capillary.
[0128] For particle aggregation and displacement experi-
ments, a stock solution carmine dye (Sigma-Aldrich C1022-
5G) was created at a concentration of 0.01 g per 10 ml
0.75×MMR and vortexed for 10 seconds. Individual work-
ing solutions were then created in 1% agarose coated
polystyrene petri dishes by diluting the stock 1:10, again in
0.75×MMR, for a final concentration of 0.001 g per 10 ml.
Dishes containing the working solution were housed under
an imaging microscope and allowed to settle for four hours
at 22° C., creating a layer of particulate dye on the surface
of the dish. Silicone coated iron oxide spheres (Ocean
Nanotech SOR-10-50) were prepared in a similar manner,
though only one hour of settling was necessary due to the
higher density of the material.
[0129] m6: Wound healing. To assess wound healing,
individual Xenobots aged 4 to 7 days post-explantation were
moved to fresh 1% agarose coated petri dishes containing
0.75×MMR. Surgical forceps were used to create a mechani-
cal laceration spanning approximately one half the diameter
of the individual. Images were collected before injury,
directly following injury, May 10, 2015 minutes following
injury, and after 48 h of healing. Images were first processed
by cropping, downsampling, and binarization. To crop the
images, contours were automatically drawn on the image by
traversing the boundaries of each transition between body
and background pixels to find closed loops (each of which
is a contour). A bounding box was then drawn around the
largest contour (by area), and the rest of the image is
trimmed off. Finally, the cropped images were resized
(downsampled) to a constant resolution (300×300). These
processed images were then assessed by comparing each
timepoint to its initial shape using Hausdorff distance. To
calculate Hausdorff distance, the image was binarized, with
each pixel assigned either 1 (for pixels belonging to the body
of the organism) or 0 (the background). The Hausdorff
distance is the largest discrepancy between pairs of pre- and
post-damage body pixel coordinates, in terms of euclidean
distance.
[0130] Formally, the Hausdorff distance for tissue type 1 is
defined as:
H = max (supasinfbed(a, b), sup bebinfasad(a, b)}, [Eqn. H.]
[0131] where A and B are the sets of pre- and post-damage
pixels, and d(a, b) is the Euclidean distance between pixels
a and b. A small Hausdorff distance indicates that for every
pixel prior to damage there is a pixel nearby post-damage,
and vice versa. During repair, we measure the amount of
shape change toward the pre-damage shape using the sta-
tistic
A=Hpost/Hinjury,
[Eqn. Delta.]
which is a ratio of two Hausdorff distances: one taken
recovery (numerator) and the other immediately after injury
(denominator).
[0132] Because H is sensitive to rotation, H was calculated
360 times for every post-damage image, each time rotating
the image by 1 degree. The rotation with the best match (the
smallest H) was selected and plotted in FIG. 1. Because His
sensitive to the position of the body within the frame of an
image, copies of images were auto-cropped (FIG. 2) such
that the edge of the design fills the frame, and H was
recalculated (with 360 rotations). Final Hausdorff distances

[PAGE 10] m3: Microinjection.
of the study. All pharmaceuticals were stored as stocks at 4°
C. and working solutions were refreshed every three days.
m3: Microinjection. All mRNA was synthesized
using standard message machine kits (Life Technologies)
and stored at -80° C. until used. Prior to injection, cohorts
of 4 cell stage embryos were transferred to a 3% Ficoll
solution and aligned in a laser etched Petri dish. Individual
embryos were then injected into each of the 4 cells using a
pulled capillary to deliver approximately 500 ng of RNA in
a 50 nL volume to each cell. Four cell embryos were chosen
for injection over one cell due to the observation that
expression tended to be more uniform at the 4-cell stage.
Two hours after microinjection the embryos were washed
twice in 0.1×MMR (pH 7.8), moved to new Petri dishes, and
moved to a 22° C. incubator overnight. The following
morning, the embryos were cleaned one final time before
processing for animal cap excision. Constructs used in the
current study included the multi-ciliated cell inhibitor
Notch-ICD (33, 34) and EosFP (35).

[PAGE 10] m4: Immunohistochemistry.
m4: Immunohistochemistry. Multi-ciliated cell
number was visualized through immunohistochemistry with
the monoclonal anti-acetylated alpha tubulin antibody
(Sigma T7451) using a protocol described previously (36).
Cohorts of Xenobots from each treatment were pooled and
transferred to a 3 ml scintillation vial containing MEMFA
fixative (100 mM MOPS (pH 7.4), 2 mM EGTA, 1 mM
MgSO4, 3.7% (v/v) formaldehyde). Fixation proceeded for
2H at room temperature on a nutator, after which the fixative
was removed with a disposable pipette and the Xenobots
were washed three times, ten minutes per wash, in phosphate
buffered saline+0.1% Tween 20 (PBST) and stored at 4° С.
until ready for processing. Processing began by blocking for
1H at room temperature with 10% goat serum in PBST.
Samples were then rocked overnight at 4° C. in monoclonal
anti-acetylated alpha tubulin antibody diluted 1:1000 in
PBST+10% goat serum. Following primary incubation,
samples were washed three times for 15 min in PBST before
60 min secondary incubation with AlexaFluor-555 conju-
gated secondary at 1:500 dilution in PBST. Following sec-
ondary incubation, samples were washed three times for 15
min in PBST.

[PAGE 10] m5: Behavioral analysis.
m5: Behavioral analysis. Mazes used in behavioral
tests were created from acrylic negatives and cast with 2%
agarose. Each negative was affixed to the lid of a petri dish
with a spot of cyanoacrylate-based adhesive and lowered
into a dish containing sufficient volume of melted agarose to
submerge the maze one half of its total height. Dishes cooled
at room temperature for 1 hour before being wrapped in
Parafilm and stored at 4° C. until use. For glass capillary
experiments, standard 1.0 mm OD, 0.5 mm ID, 4-inch length
capillaries (Sutter Instruments BF100-50-10) were cut down
to a 2 cm length using a diamond knife. Individual Xenobots
were then manually loaded into one end of the capillary and
observed for 10 minutes on a stereoscope with an attached
Sony IMX234 camera. In cases where movement was
observed moving out of the loading area (i.e. the opposite
direction of the preferred movement), the individual was
rotated 180 degrees and reloaded in the same manner. Trials
were considered a success if the individual emerged from the
opposite end of the capillary.

[PAGE 11] For particle aggregation and displacement experi-
ments, a stock solution carmine dye (Sigma-Aldrich C1022-
5G) was created at a concentration of 0.01 g per 10 ml
0.75×MMR and vortexed for 10 seconds. Individual work-
ing solutions were then created in 1% agarose coated
polystyrene petri dishes by diluting the stock 1:10, again in
0.75×MMR, for a final concentration of 0.001 g per 10 ml.
Dishes containing the working solution were housed under
an imaging microscope and allowed to settle for four hours
at 22° C., creating a layer of particulate dye on the surface
of the dish. Silicone coated iron oxide spheres (Ocean
Nanotech SOR-10-50) were prepared in a similar manner,
though only one hour of settling was necessary due to the
higher density of the material.

[PAGE 11] m6: Wound healing.
m6: Wound healing. To assess wound healing,
individual Xenobots aged 4 to 7 days post-explantation were
moved to fresh 1% agarose coated petri dishes containing
0.75×MMR. Surgical forceps were used to create a mechani-
cal laceration spanning approximately one half the diameter
of the individual. Images were collected before injury,
directly following injury, May 10, 2015 minutes following
injury, and after 48 h of healing. Images were first processed
by cropping, downsampling, and binarization. To crop the
images, contours were automatically drawn on the image by
traversing the boundaries of each transition between body
and background pixels to find closed loops (each of which
is a contour). A bounding box was then drawn around the
largest contour (by area), and the rest of the image is
trimmed off. Finally, the cropped images were resized
(downsampled) to a constant resolution (300×300). These
processed images were then assessed by comparing each
timepoint to its initial shape using Hausdorff distance. To
calculate Hausdorff distance, the image was binarized, with
each pixel assigned either 1 (for pixels belonging to the body
of the organism) or 0 (the background). The Hausdorff
distance is the largest discrepancy between pairs of pre- and
post-damage body pixel coordinates, in terms of euclidean
distance.

[PAGE 11] Formally, the Hausdorff distance for tissue type 1 is
defined as:
H = max (supasinfbed(a, b), sup bebinfasad(a, b)}, [Eqn. H.]
where A and B are the sets of pre- and post-damage
pixels, and d(a, b) is the Euclidean distance between pixels
a and b. A small Hausdorff distance indicates that for every
pixel prior to damage there is a pixel nearby post-damage,
and vice versa. During repair, we measure the amount of
shape change toward the pre-damage shape using the sta-
tistic
A=Hpost/Hinjury,
[Eqn. Delta.]
which is a ratio of two Hausdorff distances: one taken
recovery (numerator) and the other immediately after injury
(denominator).
Because H is sensitive to rotation, H was calculated
360 times for every post-damage image, each time rotating
the image by 1 degree. The rotation with the best match (the
smallest H) was selected and plotted in FIG. 1. Because His
sensitive to the position of the body within the frame of an
image, copies of images were auto-cropped (FIG. 2) such
that the edge of the design fills the frame, and H was
recalculated (with 360 rotations). Final Hausdorff distances

[PAGE 11] conformed to normality and were compared using a repeated
measures ANOVA, followed by Dunnett's post-hoc com-
parison of injury values to all proceeding timepoints.

[PAGE 11] m7: Imaging.
m7: Imaging. Xenobot morphology was imaged
using a Nikon SMZ-1500 microscope attached to a QImag-
ing Retiga 2000R CCD camera. Live samples were photo-
graphed in 0.75×MMR at 22° C. using both overhead and
substage illumination in combination with a concavity slide
to keep the Xenobots in view. Immunofluorescence was
detected using a 4x or 10x objective and standard TRITC
filter cube on an Olympus BX-61 microscope equipped with
a Photometrics CoolSNAP DYNO CCD camera and
CoolLED PE-300 lightsource. Images were captured as tiff
z-stacks and combined into composite images using Meta-
morph software before being moved to ImageJ for analysis.

[PAGE 11] m8: Motion tracking.
m8: Motion tracking. Motion tracking of Xenobot
behavior was completed by uploading time-lapse videos into
Ethovision XT v.14/15 (Noldus Information Technology). A
scaled background image was uploaded prior to data pro-
cessing to accurately set movement speeds and distance.
Tracking was completed in using automated settings and the
coordinates of each xenobot position across the time lapse
was then exported as an .xslv file via analysis tools. Any
tracking errors were manually removed (field values left
empty) in the .xslv file after the coordinates were exported
from Ethovision for statistical analysis.

[PAGE 11] m9: Modeling collective behavior.
m9: Modeling collective behavior. All modeling
was run in voxcraft-sim (37), a GPU-accelerated implemen-
tation of the Voxcad environment, which has been docu-
mented previously (38, 39). Xenobots are simulated by
hundreds of elastic voxels (deformable cuboids), each
approximating a section of tissue, rather than a one-to-one
voxel-to-cell representation. At each time step, the dynamics
(position and motion) of every voxel can be updated in
parallel across multiple independent simulations. Xenobots
here were simulated with Young's modulus of 0.02 MPa,
density 1,500 kg/m^3, 0.35 Poisson's ratio, and coefficients
of static and dynamic friction of 1 and 0.5, respectively. The
simulated debris were slightly stiffer (0.03 MPa), less dense
(1,000 kg/m^3), and had a higher coefficient of dynamic
friction (0.8). The debris were made slightly adhesive to
better approximate the real properties of the physical par-
ticulate matter: a persisting but breakable bond was formed
between a pair of voxels if they touched and broken if the
bond's stress exceeds a threshold (0.05 MPa).

[PAGE 11] The material properties of the voxels were manu-
ally adjusted for simulation speed (heavier/softer material
can be stably simulated with a larger time step of numerical
integration because their resonance frequency is lower than
lighter/stiffer material). Each simulation consisted of 22,940
time steps (long enough to see pile-making behavior occur),
with step size 0.00044 sec (low enough to ensure simulation
stability; for details see (38)), yielding an evaluation period
of ten seconds. The aggregate (metachronal wave) force
produced by a patch of beating cilia was modeled on each
surface voxel as an impulse force originating at the center of
the voxel and pointing in any direction in the horizontal (x,y)
plane. Internal voxels inside a Xenobot do not have cilia, nor
do the debris. The maximal magnitude of the force was
manually adjusted to ensure that the maximal speed would
not cause continual tumbling behavior (which has not been
observed in vivo).

[PAGE 11] A generative network (40) was used to genetically
encode the cilia force of every surface voxel. The network
takes as input the initial x,y,z position of a voxel (at
simulation time t=0) and outputs an impulse force for that
voxel. This force is then fixed for the remainder of the
evaluation period. The network is inherently biased such that
when it generates the constant force for each surface voxel
in the simulated swarm, voxel pairs close together in space
are more likely to have similar cilia forces than a pair of
initially distant voxels. This biases search toward spatial
regularity. For more details, see (41).

[PAGE 11] An evolutionary algorithm (42) was employed that
maintains a population of 40 initially random genetic net-
works for 500 generations. At every generation, the popu-
lation is doubled by making a randomly mutated copy of
each of the 40 networks, where a mutation either adds,
removes, or modifies one of the network's edges or vertices
(for more details see (11)). Each network then generates cilia
forces for a swarm of virtual Xenobots, and the swarm's
behavior is evaluated for ten seconds in simulation. The
fitness of a swarm (F) was measured as the number of debris
voxel pairs within three voxel length units of each other
(they are initialized on a grid, four voxel lengths away):
F =
1,225 1,225
Σd(vi, vj)
i=1 j=1
Eqn. MCB.
where v; is the i-th debris voxel (within the 35×35=1,225
grid of debris),
d(a, b) = 1 if dist(a, b) <3
d(a, b) = 0 otherwise,
where dist() is the euclidean distance.

[PAGE 11] This objective function was intended to promote
the evolution of pile-making behavior. We also investigated
an alternative objective function that measured the pairwise
sum of voxel distances; however, the penalty of moving
debris apart resulted in no Xenobot movement.

[PAGE 11] Results
Xenopus embryonic ectoderm creates a motile liv-
ing machine. Previous reports utilized a top down approach
to impose shape, cell type, and contractile motion on a first
generation of mobile living machines (11). In contrast, the
current study used a bottom up approach to ask whether cells
removed from their normal developmental constraints
would be able to self-organize into a different type of living
form. Production began by harvesting stem cell tissue from
the animal hemisphere, a region of undifferentiated pre-
sumptive ectoderm, from Neiuwkoop and Faber stage 9
Xenopus laevis embryos (FIG. 1A). Tissue explants were
then moved to a 0.75× Marc's Modified Ringer's (MMR)
solution, pH 7.8 and allowed to heal for 1 h at 20° C. (FIG.
1B) and then cultured at 14° C. until experimentation begins
(FIG. 1D). Under these conditions, explants form into
spheres of tissue (FIG. 1C) that differentiate over the course
of 4 days into ciliated epithelium. Three days after forma-
tion, explants become mobile in aqueous solutions and are
capable of moving at rates exceeding 100 µm/s (FIG. 1E).
Fully differentiated spheres range in size from an average of

[PAGE 12] 487±39 µm for the smallest cut explants, to 602±30 µm for
the largest (n=15 and 13 respectively).
Surprisingly, we observed motile behavior, as the
cells' native cilia, which normally move material past the
animal surface, were spontaneously re-purposed for coher-
ent locomotion. Movement is driven by flow arising from
multiciliated cells present on the surface of the construct
(which are revealed by anti-acetylated tubulin immunohis-
tochemistry (FIG. 1F)). Further, this motion can be abol-
ished by inhibiting multiciliated cell formation through
overexpression of the Notch receptor intracellular domain
(NotchICD), which drives the differentiating tissue to other
epidermal cell fates (FIG. 1F'). Multiciliated cells are also
naturally present on the skin of the frog (FIG. 1G), and
likewise respond to the overexpression of NotchICD (FIG.
1G'), though explants display a higher multi-ciliated cell
density per area than age matched tadpoles (FIG. 1H).
The degree of behavioral complexity we observed
is normally associated with a nervous system (43). Although
made entirely of skin, we sought to confirm whether there
might be any neurons in the Xenobots. Using a pan-neuronal
marker in immunohistochemistry, we showed that no neu-
rons were present at the surface or internally in any of the
individuals imaged (FIG. 6, n=24), indicating that their
behavior is driven entirely by the signaling and functional
dynamics of non-neural cells. The Xenobots are thus a new
synthetic model for understanding preneural life forms and
their capacities (44, 45).
Explants have a lifespan of approximately 9-10
days after formation and do not require an external food
source as they metabolize the maternally loaded yolk plate-
lets present in all early embryonic Xenopus tissues. While
their spontaneous disintegration is a welcome safety feature
for deploying synthetic biobots, we sought methods to
extend their working capacity by taking advantage of the
cells' metabolic machinery. We found that their lifespan can
be extended for timeframes exceeding 90 days if raised in a
Xenopus specific culture media (FIG. 7). This ability to
control their lifespan also availed us the opportunity to
characterize their novel "developmental sequence", as their
morphology is not like that of normal Xenopus embryos. We
found that their pigmentation lightens with age (FIG. 1I-J'),
although their average velocity does not vary significantly
across explant lifespan (Kruskal-Wallis one-way ANOVA,
p=0.29, FIG. 1K), and they eventually acquire a balloon-
like, extended spheroid morphology (FIG. 7). At the end of
their lifespan, explants begin shedding cells and deteriorate
until the multiciliated cells no longer function and the tissue
disintegrates. Together, these results demonstrate that
embryonic explants from genomically-normal Xenopus cells
form motile living machines with novel morphologies which
are capable of aqueous locomotion via cilia.

[PAGE 12] Xenobots self-repair after damage.
Xenobots self-repair after damage. A desired fea-
ture in biological and artificial machines is a robust ability
to deal with unexpected damage, arising from both normal
wear and tear or external environmental insult. To examine
the repair ability of Xenobots, 5 day old individuals were
given severe mechanical lacerations with surgical forceps.
Lacerations were performed with a single incision, opening
a wound across approximately half of the diameter of the
individual, and spanning the entire width. Images were
collected prior to damage, directly proceeding damage,
5/10/15 m post damage, and 48 h following injury. In all
cases individuals were capable of resolving the wound,

[PAGE 14] Discussion
Here we documented the creation of Xenobots,
synthetic living machines derived from amphibian embry-
onic explants, their ability to spontaneously exhibit collec-
tive behavior, and the potential to design such swarms in
future to exaggerate these behaviors. Compared to our
previously reported design method (which produced con-
tractile driven motion through top-down implementation of
shape and tissue placement (11)) the Xenobots reported here
exhibit bottom up emergent behaviors and generate move-
ment through multiciliated cell propulsion. These swimming
Xenobots survive for up to ten days in mild saline solution
without additional energy sources, and for multiple months
if supplemented with cell culture medium. Movement first
appears four days after construction and average velocity
remains constant across the lifespan of the Xenobot cohorts.
Further, motion can be inhibited through the overexpression
of the intracellular domain of notch, which inhibits multi-
ciliated cell development by driving precursors to other
epidermal lineages. Together, this design method allows for
the rapid generation of many mobile constructs with mini-
mum top down design from the investigator.
Xenobot speed and behavior remains constant
across their ten-day lifespan, pointing to their potential for
maintaining desired swarm behavior. Movement tends
towards circular rotation, although arcing and linear motion
was also observed less frequently. An interesting future area
of study would include the enhancement of planar cell
polarity patterning, enforcing specific tissue-scale cilia
alignment to drive user specified motion types. Further,
given their ability to self-locomote, Xenobots can move
through a variety of diverse environments from open fields
to narrow capillaries. These features suggest several pos-
sible downstream applications which are difficult for tradi-
tional robots, from the cleaning microfluidic chambers to
environmental sensing and ecologically benign remediation
in natural waterways.
The ability to program rudimentary sensing and
memory into biobots was also demonstrated. As Xenobots
can explore an aqueous environment, we designed a proof of
principle system where an individual can record exposure to
an environmental stimulus that can be read at a later time by
an observer, using the photoconvertible reporter EosFP.
After expressing the protein in Xenobots through mRNA
microinjection, individuals emit strong fluorescence in green
wavelengths. However, following exposure to 400 nm blue
light, the reporter undergoes a permanent conformational
change, shifting emission wavelengths from green to red.
Using this feature, we were able to show that unsupervised

[PAGE 14] Discussion
Here we documented the creation of Xenobots, synthetic living machines derived from amphibian embryonic explants, their ability to spontaneously exhibit collective behavior, and the potential to design such swarms in future to exaggerate these behaviors. Compared to our previously reported design method (which produced contractile driven motion through top-down implementation of shape and tissue placement (11)) the Xenobots reported here exhibit bottom up emergent behaviors and generate movement through multiciliated cell propulsion. These swimming Xenobots survive for up to ten days in mild saline solution without additional energy sources, and for multiple months if supplemented with cell culture medium. Movement first appears four days after construction and average velocity remains constant across the lifespan of the Xenobot cohorts. Further, motion can be inhibited through the overexpression of the intracellular domain of notch, which inhibits multiciliated cell development by driving precursors to other epidermal lineages. Together, this design method allows for the rapid generation of many mobile constructs with minimum top down design from the investigator.

Xenobot speed and behavior remains constant across their ten-day lifespan, pointing to their potential for maintaining desired swarm behavior. Movement tends towards circular rotation, although arcing and linear motion was also observed less frequently. An interesting future area of study would include the enhancement of planar cell polarity patterning, enforcing specific tissue-scale cilia alignment to drive user specified motion types. Further, given their ability to self-locomote, Xenobots can move through a variety of diverse environments from open fields to narrow capillaries. These features suggest several possible downstream applications which are difficult for traditional robots, from the cleaning microfluidic chambers to environmental sensing and ecologically benign remediation in natural waterways.

The ability to program rudimentary sensing and memory into biobots was also demonstrated. As Xenobots can explore an aqueous environment, we designed a proof of principle system where an individual can record exposure to an environmental stimulus that can be read at a later time by an observer, using the photoconvertible reporter EosFP. After expressing the protein in Xenobots through mRNA microinjection, individuals emit strong fluorescence in green wavelengths. However, following exposure to 400 nm blue light, the reporter undergoes a permanent conformational change, shifting emission wavelengths from green to red. Using this feature, we were able to show that unsupervised Xenobots could explore an environment containing an illuminated blue spot, and exposure to this light could subsequently be assessed using fluorescent microscopy. The general methodology of the approach could be readily adapted to a wide variety of scenarios including: increased/decreased sensitivity to stimuli, chemical/contaminant detection, bioaccumulation of target substances, release of compounds upon sensation of stimuli, multimodal recording, and nested if/then circuitry.

Unlike current robots, in which robustness must be programmed in, Xenobots exhibit automatic self-repair following injury. When presented with lacerations, all individuals were able to heal the wound within 15 minutes and in no cases did an individual perish as a result of the insult. Tadpoles also rapidly resolve injuries resulting from mechanical damage or transplantation, revealing that like ciliary motion, emergent capabilities of cell groups can be deployed in different ways on very different body architectures. Further, contraction at the wound site is sufficient to close minor injuries but the mechanism behind large scale damage repair is unknown. The ability to self-repair remains an important feature of soft-bodied robots that is difficult to achieve using synthetic materials (47) but emerges naturally from the biology of our constructs.

While current Xenobots do not contain specialized sense organs, they display many behaviors comparable to those observed in highly sensorized robots, including the aggregation of environmental debris. We found that Xenobots can move through and push small amounts of debris, clearing regions of the arena while depositing piles of material elsewhere. To test if this behavior could result purely from the physics of sensorless locomoting bodies, we developed a new GPU-based physics engine that could handle the computational demands of many interacting soft bodies at high mechanical resolution. Our simulation results demonstrate that it is indeed possible to achieve the complex pile-making behavior seen in the physical Xenobots without any feedback from sensors. These modeling studies also provide a framework for predicting the collective behavior of a swarm of cilia-driven physical Xenobots based on their geometry, despite the difficulty of predicting cilia-driven movement of an individual physical Xenobot. Such studies also suggest that machine learning methods may in future automatically design the shape and tissue distribution of simulated biobots to maximize desired collective behavior in silico, which retain that collective function when physical copies of the best designs are constructed and deployed. This seems achievable, as transference was obtained with Xenobots previously, for desired individual behavior (11).

Finally, biobots differ from both robot swarms and modular robots in that they exhibit collective behavior and modularity at least four scales. There is the biobot swarm itself, but each individual biobot is composed of thousands of cells, each of which is itself a complex and semiautonomous machine. Finally, the intricate internal architecture of a cell houses myriad self-motile machines that build and maintain cellular integrity and function. Such multiscale structure poses unique future challenges and opportunities for altering collective function at each and all of these scales.

Together, these in vitro and in silico results provide a pipeline to move between the physical and virtual world, where results in one environment can inform the other. For example, modeling may allow rapid testing of many parameters that would be impossible biologically due to the time and effort involved. Alternatively, biological experiments can provide baselines and constraints to existing models, refining them with values which are translatable to real world scenarios for a range of downstream applications.

The computational modeling of unexpected, emergent properties at multiple scales, and the apparent plasticity of cells with wild-type genomes to cooperate toward the construction of new, functional body architectures, offer a very powerful synergy. Future work to better predict and control of the structure and function of synthetic living machines is likely to broadly impact several fields. Basic evolutionary developmental biology and basal cognition can use this new model to understand self-assembly of body forms and functional controllers. Moreover, existing toolkits of synthetic biology, bioelectrical signaling, and computation via cell networks offer an extremely rich space of possible living machines with useful functions including biomedicine, environmental remediation, and exploration (48-52).

[PAGE 16] Example 2-Kinematic Self-Replication in Reconfigurable Organisms

Reference is made to Kriegman et al., "Kinematic self-replicatoin in reconfigurable organisms," Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2021 Dec. 7; 1189 (49): e2112672118. doi: 10.1073/pnas.2112672118, the content of which is incorporated herein by reference in its entirety.

All living systems perpetuate themselves via growth in or on the body, followed by splitting, budding, or birth. We find that synthetic multicellular assemblies can also replicate kinematically by moving and compressing dissociated cells in their environment into functional self copies. This form of perpetuation, previously unseen in any organism, arises spontaneously over days rather than evolving over millennia. We also show how Al methods can design assemblies that postpone loss of replicative ability and perform useful work as a side effect of replication. This suggests other unique and useful phenotypes can be rapidly reached from wild type organisms without selection or genetic engineering, thereby broadening our understanding of the conditions under which replication arises, phenotypic plasticity, and how useful replicative machines may be realized.

[PAGE 16] Significance
Almost all organisms replicate by growing and then shedding offspring. Some molecules also replicate, but by moving rather than growing: they find and combine building blocks into self copies. Here we show that clusters of cells, if freed from a developing organism, can similarly find and combine loose cells into clusters that look and move like they do, and that this ability does not have to be evolved or introduced by genetic manipulation. Finally, we show that Al can design clusters that replicate better, and perform useful work as they do so. This suggests future technologies may, with little outside guidance, become more useful as they spread, and that life harbors surprising behaviors just below the surface, waiting to be uncovered.

[PAGE 16] Introduction
Like the other necessary abilities life must possess to survive, replication has evolved into many diverse forms: fission, budding, fragmentation, spore formation, vegetative propagation, parthenogenesis, sexual reproduction, hermaphroditism, and viral propagation. These diverse processes however share a common property: all involve growth within or on the body of the organism. In contrast, a non-growth-based form of self replication dominates at the subcellular level: molecular machines assemble material in their external environment into functional self copies directly, or in concert with other machines. Such kinematic replication has never been observed at higher levels of biological organization, nor was it known whether multicellular systems were even capable of it.

Despite this lack, organisms do possess deep reservoirs of adaptive potential at all levels of organization, allowing for manual or automated interventions that deflect development toward biological forms and functions different from wild type (1), including the growth and maintenance of organs independent of their host organism (2,3,4), or unlocking regenerative capacity (5,6,7). Design, if framed as morphological reconfiguration, can reposition biological tissues or redirect self organizing processes to new stable forms without recourse to genomic editing or transgenes (8). Recent work has shown that individual, genetically unmodified prospective skin (9) and heart muscle (10) cells, when removed from their native embryonic microenvironments and reassembled, can organize into stable forms and behaviors not exhibited by the organism from which the cells were taken, at any point in its natural life cycle. We show here that if cells are similarly liberated, compressed, and placed among more dissociated cells that serve as feedstock, they can exhibit kinematic self replication, a behavior not only absent from the donating organism, but from every other known plant or animal. Further, replication does not evolve in response to selection pressures, but arises spontaneously over five days, given appropriate initial and environmental conditions.


[PAGE 17] Results
Pluripotent stem cells were collected from the animal pole of X. laevis embryos (FIG. 12A) and raised for 24 h in 14° C. mild saline solution. These excised cells, if left together as an animal cap (11) (FIG. 12A,B) or brought back in contact after dissociation (12) (FIG. 12C,D), naturally adhere and differentiate into a spheroid of epidermis covered by ciliated epithelium (13,14) over five days (9) (Sect. S1; FIG. 8A). The resulting wild type reconfigurable organisms move using multiciliated cells present along their surface (which generate flow through the coordinated beating of hairlike projections) and typically follow helical trajectories through an aqueous solution for a period of 10-14 days, before shedding cells and deteriorating as their maternally-provided energy stores are depleted.

Previous studies reported spontaneous aggregation of artificial particles by groups of wild type self-organizing (9) and Al-designed (10) reconfigurable organisms: the particles were gathered and compressed as a side effect of their movement. Here, kinematic self replication was achieved by replacing the synthetic particles in the arena with dissociated X. laevis stem cells as follows.

When 12 wild type reconfigurable organisms are placed in a petri dish amid dissociated stem cells (FIG. 8B), their combined movement re-aggregates some of the dissociated cells into piles (FIG. 8C,D). Piled cells adhere, compact, and, over five days, develop into more ciliated spheroids (FIG. 8E) also capable of self propelled movement. These offspring are then separated from their progenitor spheroids and placed in a new petri dish containing additional dissociated stem cells (FIG. 8F). There, offspring spheroids build further piles, which mature into a new generation of motile spheroids.

In four of five independent trials using densities of 25-150 cells/mm², wild type reconfigurable organisms kinematically self-replicated only one generation. In the fifth trial, two generations were achieved. Each successive generation, the size and number of offspring decreased until offspring were too small to develop into self-motile organisms, and replication halted.

To determine if offspring were indeed built by the kinematics of progenitor organisms rather than just fluid dynamics and self assembly, the dissociated stem cells were observed alone without the progenitors. With no progenitor organisms present, no offspring self-assembled at any of the stem cell concentrations tested (FIG. 13E).

[PAGE 17] Kinematic Self Replication
Given their rapid loss of replicative ability, reconfigurable organisms can be viewed as autonomous but partially functioning machines potentially amenable to improvement. Autonomous machines that replicate kinematically by combining raw materials into independent functional self copies have long been known to be theoretically possible (15). Since then, kinematic replicators have been of use for reasoning about abiogenesis, but they have also been of engineering interest: If physical replicators could be designed to perform useful work as a side effect of replication, and sufficient building material were discoverable or provided, the replicators would be collectively capable of exponential utility over time, with only a small initial investment in progenitor machine design, manufacture and deployment. To that end, computational (16,17,18), mechanical (19) and robotic (20-23) self replicators have been built, but to date, all are made from artificial materials and are manually designed. Kinematic self replication may also, in contrast to growth-based biological forms of reproduction, offer many options for automated improvement due to its unique reliance on self movement. If progenitor machines could be automatically designed, it may become possible to automatically improve machine replication fidelity (24), increase or alter the utility performed as a side effect of replication, allow replication to feed on more atomic materials (25), control replication speed and spread, and extend the number of replication cycles before the system suffers a loss of replicative ability. We introduce an Al method here that can indeed extend replication cycles by designing the shape of the progenitor reconfigurable organisms.

[PAGE 17] Amplifying Kinematic Self Replication
Determining sufficient conditions for self replication requires substantial effort and resources. Each round of replication takes one week, and regular media changes are required to minimize contamination. Thus, an evolutionary algorithm was developed and combined with a physics simulator to seek conditions likely to yield increased self replication, measured as the number of rounds of replication achieved before halting, in the simulator. Progenitor shape was chosen as the condition to be varied, as previous work demonstrated that shapes of simulated organisms can be evolved in silico to produce locomotion in cardiac tissue-driven reconfigurable organisms (10), or enhanced synthetic particle aggregation by ciliated-driven reconfigurable organisms (9).

Simulations indicated that some body shapes amplified pile size and replication rounds, while others damped or halted self replication. Some, but not all geometries were better than the spheroids. The most performant geometry discovered by the evolutionary algorithm in silico and manufacturable in vivo was a semi-torus (FIG. 9A). When 12 semitoroidal progenitor organisms were constructed and placed in an arena filled with densities of 61-91 dissociated stem cells/mm², they exhibited the same enhanced piling behavior in vivo observed in silico (FIG. 9B). The offspring produced by the progenitor spheroids (FIG. 29C) were significantly smaller than those produced by the progenitor semitoroids (FIG. 9D), although both progenitor groups produced spheroid offspring. Controlling for dissociated cell density, the diameter of offspring produced by progenitor spheroids was increased 149% by the progenitor semitoroids (p<0.05) (FIG. 9E). The replication rounds achieved by progenitor spheroids (mean=1.2+/-0.4SD, max of 2 shown in FIG. 9F) was increased 250% by the progenitor semitoroids (mean=3+/-0.8SD, max of four shown in FIG. 9G) (p<0.05). The only trial using semitoroids that reproduced less than three rounds was terminated early due to fungal contamination. Across the five trials with wild type progenitor spheroids and the three trials with Al-designed progenitor semitoroids, the size of the first generation of offspring correlated with the total number of generations achieved (rho=0.93; p<0.001).

[PAGE 18] Given the observation that larger spheroids yielded more replication rounds, another, simpler route to increasing self replication seemed possible: increasing the density of dissociated cells. However, FIG. 9E shows that spheroid offspring size does not appreciably increase even when tripling density from 50 to 150 cells/mm² in the presence of sphere progenitors.

The semitoroidal design was found in silico using an evolutionary algorithm (FIG. 10A). First, sixteen progenitor shapes are randomly generated. For each shape, nine simulated organisms with that shape are evaluated within a simulated petri dish (FIG. 10E). If the swarm creates piles large enough to mature into offspring, the simulated offspring are transferred to a fresh dish (FIG. 10F) and the process continues (FIG. 10G). When self replication halts, the shape is assigned a performance score computed as the number of filial generations achieved. Higher performing progenitor shapes are copied, mutated, and replace shapes in the population with poorer performance. Each of the newly-created progenitor shapes is expanded into a swarm, simulated, and scored (FIG. 310C). The algorithm terminates after a fixed amount of computational effort has been expended, and the shape that produced the most replication rounds is extracted (FIG. 10D). Forty nine independent optimization trials were conducted, yielding 49 high performing progenitor shapes (FIG. 10H) that, in silico, produce larger offspring (p<0.0001) and more replication rounds (p<0.0001) than simulated wild type spheroids (FIG. 17).

Conditions other than progenitor shape can be optimized to improve self replication. To that end, the algorithm was modified to evolve terrain shape rather than progenitor shape to amplify self replication in silico for wild type spheroid progenitors. Terrain was shaped by the inclusion of reconfigurable walls that, once positioned along the bottom surface of the simulated dish, constrain the stochastic movement of organisms along more predictable trajectories within predefined limits. Starting with randomly generated terrains, the algorithm evolved terrains that, in silico, increased the number of replication rounds achieved by the wild type spheroid progenitors, compared to their performance on a flat surface (p<0.0001) (FIGS. 18-19).

The algorithm not only can amplify kinematic self replication in a given environment but can also bestow this capability on swarms otherwise incapable of achieving it in adverse environments. In a cluttered environment, the wild type progenitors cannot move enough to self replicate. However, the algorithm discovered progenitor shapes with ventral surfaces that elevated the simulated organisms above the clutter while maintaining frontal plane curvatures that facilitated pile making and the achieving of self replication (FIG. 20).

In contrast to other known forms of biological reproduction, kinematic self replication allows for the opportunity to significantly enlarge and miniaturize offspring each generation. This was observed in vivo (FIG. 8G) and in silico (FIG. 21). This suggests that swarms may be automatically designed in future to produce offspring of diverse size, shape and useful behaviors beyond simply more self replication.

[PAGE 18] Exponential Utility
von Neumann's original self replicating machine (15) was capable in theory of not just building a functional self copy, but also other machines as a side effect of the replicative process. If these tangential machines performed useful work, the entire system was capable of exponential utility. As long as sufficient feedstock was available, only a small expenditure of energy and manufacture was required to build the first replicative machine. To estimate whether the self replicating reconfigurable organisms introduced here may be capable of exponential utility, we created a computational model using known features of the physical semitoroids to forecast their potential rate of increase in utility. It is assumed that progenitor machines will be placed in semi-structured environments, sufficient feedstock will be within reach, and random action of the swarm will be sufficient to result in useful work. Given these requirements, the task of microcircuit assembly was chosen (FIG. 11A). Although current circuit assembly systems are fast, efficient and reliable, in situ repair or assembly of simple electronics in hostile or remote environments is currently impossible using traditional robots, rendering this a use case worthy of investigation. The simulated environment contains microscale power supplies (26), light emitters (27), and disconnected flexible adhesive wires (28) (FIG. 22). Random action by swarm members can inadvertently move wires and close a circuit between a power supply and a light emitter (FIG. 11A), considered here as useful work. The environment is also assumed to contain dissociated stem cells, such that offspring organisms may be built in parallel with circuit assembly. If any offspring are built, they are divided into two groups and moved into two new dishes with more electronic components and stem cells (FIG. 11B,C). If no offspring are built, the process terminates (FIG. 11D). In this model, utility increases quadratically over time (FIG. 11E).

Superlinear utility here depends on a superlinearly increasing supply of dissociated stem cells. This may be more achievable than mining artificial materials for non-biological robot replicators given that a single female X. laevis can produce thousands of eggs daily, with each embryo containing~3000 cells for dissociation, and X. laevis itself is capable of reproduction and thereby superlinearly increasing egg production. Reconfigurable organisms are thus constructed from a renewable material source which requires less invasive component sourcing than other existing self-motile biological machines (29,30). The quadratic increase in utility predicted by the model in FIG. 11 may not be achievable when in situ circuit assembly and repair matures and the model can be tested empirically. But, as long as the components are small enough in weight and size to be moved, an acceptable temperature range is maintained, sufficient components have already been created and deployed and are nontoxic, and self replication is maintained, the system will produce superlinear increases in

duced by progenitor spheroids was increased 149% by the
progenitor semitoroids (p<0.05) (FIG. 9E). The replication
rounds achieved by progenitor spheroids (mean=1.2+/-0.
4SD, max of 2 shown in FIG. 9F) was increased 250% by
the progenitor semitoroids (mean=3+/-0.8SD, max of four
shown in FIG. 9G) (p<0.05). The only trial using semitor-
oids that reproduced less than three rounds was terminated
early due to fungal contamination. Across the five trials with
wild type progenitor spheroids and the three trials with
Al-designed progenitor semitoroids, the size of the first
generation of offspring correlated with the total number of
generations achieved (rho=0.93; p<0.001).

[0229] Given the observation that larger spheroids yielded
more replication rounds, another, simpler route to increasing
self replication seemed possible: increasing the density of
dissociated cells. However, FIG. 9E shows that spheroid
offspring size does not appreciably increase even when
tripling density from 50 to 150 cells/mm² in the presence of
sphere progenitors.

[0230] The semitoroidal design was found in silico using
an evolutionary algorithm (FIG. 10A). First, sixteen pro-
genitor shapes are randomly generated. For each shape, nine
simulated organisms with that shape are evaluated within a
simulated petri dish (FIG. 10E). If the swarm creates piles
large enough to mature into offspring, the simulated off-
spring are transferred to a fresh dish (FIG. 10F) and the
process continues (FIG. 10G). When self replication halts,
the shape is assigned a performance score computed as the
number of filial generations achieved. Higher performing
progenitor shapes are copied, mutated, and replace shapes in
the population with poorer performance. Each of the newly-
created progenitor shapes is expanded into a swarm, simu-
lated, and scored (FIG. 310C). The algorithm terminates
after a fixed amount of computational effort has been
expended, and the shape that produced the most replication
rounds is extracted (FIG. 10D). Forty nine independent
optimization trials were conducted, yielding 49 high per-
forming progenitor shapes (FIG. 10H) that, in silico, pro-
duce larger offspring (p<0.0001) and more replication
rounds (p<0.0001) than simulated wild type spheroids (FIG.
17).

[0231] Conditions other than progenitor shape can be
optimized to improve self replication. To that end, the
algorithm was modified to evolve terrain shape rather than
progenitor shape to amplify self replication in silico for wild
type spheroid progenitors. Terrain was shaped by the inclu-
sion of reconfigurable walls that, once positioned along the
bottom surface of the simulated dish, constrain the stochas-
tic movement of organisms along more predictable trajec-
tories within predefined limits. Starting with randomly gen-
erated terrains, the algorithm evolved terrains that, in silico,
increased the number of replication rounds achieved by the
wild type spheroid progenitors, compared to their perfor-
mance on a flat surface (p<0.0001) (FIGS. 18-19).

[0232] The algorithm not only can amplify kinematic self
replication in a given environment but can also bestow this
capability on swarms otherwise incapable of achieving it in
adverse environments. In a cluttered environment, the wild
type progenitors cannot move enough to self replicate.
However, the algorithm discovered progenitor shapes with
ventral surfaces that elevated the simulated organisms above
the clutter while maintaining frontal plane curvatures that
facilitated pile making and the achieving of self replication
(FIG. 20).

[0233] In contrast to other known forms of biological
reproduction, kinematic self replication allows for the
opportunity to significantly enlarge and miniaturize off-
spring each generation. This was observed in vivo (FIG. 8G)
and in silico (FIG. 21). This suggests that swarms may be
automatically designed in future to produce offspring of
diverse size, shape and useful behaviors beyond simply
more self replication.

[PAGE 19] Exponential Utility

[0234] von Neumann's original self replicating machine
(15) was capable in theory of not just building a functional
self copy, but also other machines as a side effect of the
replicative process. If these tangential machines performed
useful work, the entire system was capable of exponential
utility. As long as sufficient feedstock was available, only a
small expenditure of energy and manufacture was required
to build the first replicative machine. To estimate whether
the self replicating reconfigurable organisms introduced here
may be capable of exponential utility, we created a compu-
tational model using known features of the physical semi-
toroids to forecast their potential rate of increase in utility.
It is assumed that progenitor machines will be placed in
semi-structured environments, sufficient feedstock will be
within reach, and random action of the swarm will be
sufficient to result in useful work. Given these requirements,
the task of microcircuit assembly was chosen (FIG. 11A).
Although current circuit assembly systems are fast, efficient
and reliable, in situ repair or assembly of simple electronics
in hostile or remote environments is currently impossible
using traditional robots, rendering this a use case worthy of
investigation. The simulated environment contains
microscale power supplies (26), light emitters (27), and
disconnected flexible adhesive wires (28) (FIG. 22). Ran-
dom action by swarm members can inadvertently move
wires and close a circuit between a power supply and a light
emitter (FIG. 11A), considered here as useful work. The
environment is also assumed to contain dissociated stem
cells, such that offspring organisms may be built in parallel
with circuit assembly. If any offspring are built, they are
divided into two groups and moved into two new dishes with
more electronic components and stem cells (FIG. 11B,C). If
no offspring are built, the process terminates (FIG. 11D). In
this model, utility increases quadratically over time (FIG.
11E).

[0235] Superlinear utility here depends on a superlinearly
increasing supply of dissociated stem cells. This may be
more achievable than mining artificial materials for non-
biological robot replicators given that a single female X.
laevis can produce thousands of eggs daily, with each
embryo containing~3000 cells for dissociation, and X. laevis
itself is capable of reproduction and thereby superlinearly
increasing egg production. Reconfigurable organisms are
thus constructed from a renewable material source which
requires less invasive component sourcing than other exist-
ing self-motile biological machines (29,30). The quadratic
increase in utility predicted by the model in FIG. 11 may not
be achievable when in situ circuit assembly and repair
matures and the model can be tested empirically. But, as
long as the components are small enough in weight and size
to be moved, an acceptable temperature range is maintained,
sufficient components have already been created and
deployed and are nontoxic, and self replication is main-
tained, the system will produce superlinear increases in

[PAGE 19] Discussion

[0236] The ability of genetically unmodified cells to be
reconfigured into kinematic self replicators, a behavior pre-
viously unobserved in plants or animals, and the fact that
this new replicative strategy arises spontaneously rather than
evolves, further exemplifies the developmental plasticity
available in biological design (1-8). 

[PAGE 22] Materials and Methods

[0239] Manual construction of reconfigurable organisms.

[PAGE 22] Forecasting utility.

where g is the total number of filial generations achieved, s
is the size of the largest pile, in voxels, at the end of an
evaluation period of 3.5 sec (16,366 time steps with step size
2.14×10-4 sec), and p is the pile size threshold required for
a pile to develop into an organism. If s is greater than p, a
new filial generation begins, otherwise the simulation ter-
minates. A conservative threshold of p=108, two-thirds the
size of the simulated wild type spheroids, was selected such
that relatively few randomly generated shapes achieved g>0
(Sect. S2.2). Such overly conservative estimates can com-
pensate for inaccuracies in other simulated parameters.

[0252] Statistical hypothesis testing. The diameters of the
10 largest physical offspring (generation 1) built by wild
type organisms across five independent trials, and across
different cell concentrations (gray points, FIG. 9E), were
compared to the diameters of those built by the semitoroidal
organisms in three independent trials (pink points, FIG. 9E).
The diameters of all offspring were normalized by dividing
by the cell concentration at which they were built. Compar-
ing offspring size in this way is a conservative test since the
volumetric difference between two spheres is eight times as
large as their diametric difference. A Mann-Whitney rank
test was performed with a sample of eight independent
measurements: the average offspring diameter within the
eight independent trials (three trials with progenitor semi-
toroids, five trials with progenitor spheroids). The null
hypothesis is that the average size of the semitoroid's
offspring (normalized by cell concentration) was no different
than the average size of wild type spheroids' offspring
(p=0.037). Controlling for false discovery rate (41), this null
hypothesis can be rejected at the 0.05 level of significance
(Sect. S4.1).

[0253] Wild type organisms produced just a single filial
generation in four of the five independent trials. The only
trial to produce two generations of offspring was the one
with the highest cell concentration tested (150 cells/mm²).
The first of three independent trials using the semitoroidal
organisms resulted in two filial generations at 61 cells/mm²,
but was then halted because the organisms all contracted a
motily-compromising fungal infection. In the second and
third trials using semitoroids, additional precautions were
taken to avoid fungal infections. Three successive genera-
tions of offspring were produced at 61 cells/mm²; four
successive generations of offspring were produced at 91
cells/mm². A Mann-Whitney rank test was performed. The
null hypothesis is that the number of generations of self
replication achieved by the semitoroids (2 g, 3 g, 4 g) was
no greater than the number of generations produced by the
wild type spheroids (1 g, 1 g, 1 g, 1 g, 2 g) (p=0.019).
Controlling for false discovery rate, the null hypothesis is
rejected at the 0.05 level of significance (Sect. S4.2).

[0254] A Spearman rank-order correlation coefficient of
0.9322 (p=0.00074) holds between the number of genera-
tions achieved and the aggregate size of the 10 largest first
generation offspring.

[0255] Forecasting utility. Three kinds of microelectronic
components, that adhere permanently upon collision, were
added to the simulation: light emitters, batteries, and wire
(FIG. 11A). Each component contains vertically stacked and
insulated conductors which maintain connectability under
translational and rotational movement in plane (FIG. 22C-
E). As a side effect of movement, reconfigurable organisms
will randomly push together microelectronics modules pres-
ent in the dish (Sect. S5.1). If a light emitter connects by an
unbroken circuit of wire to a battery, the light emitter
switches on permanently (as indicated by a red circled X in
FIGS. 11 and 22).

[0256] The swarm builds piles, which, if large enough,
develop into offspring, and the dissociated cells are replen-
ished, every 3.5 seconds. Piles under the size threshold are
removed to make way for fresh dissociated cells. Because
we are interested in estimating utility rather than self-
replication, progenitors are left in the dish and continue
building additional offspring alongside their former off-
spring for another four, 3.5 second periods. After 17.5
seconds of simulation time, the number of light emitters
connected to a power supply was recorded, the progenitors
were removed, and all offspring were extracted. The off-
spring were then split equally into two new simulated petri
dishes, each with a new partially-completed circuit (Sect.
$5.2). Self replication and circuit building begin afresh in
these two dishes, again for 17.5 seconds. This is the start of
a binary simulation tree (FIG. 11D) in which each simulation
begets at most two simulation branches, each containing one
half of the produced offspring of their root simulation. If
only a single offspring is created by a swarm after 17.5 sec,
then only one new simulation branch is started. If no
offspring were built, then that branch of the binary simula-
tion tree terminates.

[0257] After 50 simulation bifurcations, 5024 light emit-
ters were switched on. Symbolic regression (42) was used to
find the degree of a polynomial function that best explains
the cumulative number of lights switched on. Regression
found that utility increases quadratically with time, as esti-
mates found by symbolic regression all converged toward
the quadratic curve derived by ordinary least squares: 2.7x2-
43x+182.4, where x is the number of simulation bifurcations
(R2=0.9988).

[PAGE 22] REFERENCES AND NOTES FOR EXAMPLE 2

[PAGE 24] Example 3-Supplemental Material for Example 2
Materials and Methods
1. Summary of Previous Work Using Reconfigurable
Organisms.

[0301] The first manuscript to report reconfigurable organ-
isms (10) introduced a pipeline for automatically designing
cardiac-driven organisms to exhibit a desired behavior, such
as locomotion. The overall geometry of each organism, and
its internal configuration of ectoderm and cardiac muscle,
were designed ab initio using an evolutionary algorithm and
physics-based simulation. The most promising designs were
manufactured by combining cells, according to the com-
puter-generated blueprint, and shaping the resultant aggre-
gates with a microcautery electrode and surgical forceps.

[0302] Later (9), it was demonstrated that multiciliated
epithelial tissue could be used, instead of cardiac muscle, to
generate cilia-driven "swimming" designs. These ciliated
designs can be manufactured more rapidly and have a higher
probability of self motile behavior than the cardiac-driven
designs. Ciliated reconfigurable organisms can be produced
two different ways. The excised animal cap tissue, including
the outer superficial ectodermal layer, can be left intact and
allowed to heal into mucociliary epidermal spheroids (FIG.
12A,B). Alternatively, if dissociated stem cells from one or
more animal caps are brought into contact, they will adhere,
compact and reassemble into a mucociliary spheroid (FIG.
12C,D). Using either construction method, the resultant
aggregates are structurally and functionally equivalent (8).
We here refer to these motile spheres as wild type recon-
figurable organisms.

[0303] Хепоpus tissue is ideal for this use case because its
cell types and organization are known (43-51) and their
development is controllable: cells can be driven to any
lineage (52-61) and specific cell types can be inhibited or
overproduced with molecular or chemical intervention (62-
66). However, outside of (9) and (10), these tissues have not
been used as self-motile agents, nor have they been engi-
neered to exhibit specific motile functions such as particle
aggregation. In (9), the useful lifespan, velocities, and
movements of cilia-driven behavior was quantified as these
metrics were not previously reported. These data were used
to develop the simulations used in the present work, which
builds on both studies to show how ciliated tissues can be
shaped to control their collective behavior and amplify their
kinematic self replication.

[PAGE 24] 2. The Simulation.

[0304] This section details how self-replication was simu-
lated. The corresponding Table 1 details how simulation
parameters were estimated from biology.

[PAGE 24] 2.1. Biophysics in Silico.

[0305] Voxel-based physics. Biological tissues were mod-
eled as collections of elastic voxels (deformable cuboids)
(9,10). Two voxels in the same simulation can connect face
to face on a 3D cartesian grid by a single Euler-Bernoulli
beam, forming a small body. A beam starts at the center point
mass of one voxel and ends at the center of the other voxel.
Beams have rotational and translational stiffness allowing
for local stretching, compressing, bending, and twisting of
one voxel mass relative to another.

[0306] Simulated organisms comprise hundreds of voxels.
Each voxel within an organism is connected by beams to at
most six other voxels, one on each of its six faces (up, down,
left, right, front, back). Voxels with less than six beams thus
have at least one face that is exposed, forming one part of the
external surface of the organism's body (or part of the
surface of an internal cavity). Self-collisions between two
non-neighboring surface voxels are resolved by temporary

[PAGE 24] Gpu Acceleration.

[0308] To simulate the swarms of colliding organisms and
dissociated stem cells reported in the present work, we used
voxcraft-sim (67), a GPU-accelerated re-implementation of
Voxelyze (the physical simulator underpinning VoxCAD
(40)) with a more scalable tree-based collision system (68).
In Voxelyze, voxels are evaluated sequentially on a single
thread of a CPU. In voxcraft-sim, thousands of voxels can be
evaluated concurrently on a GPU (FIG. 16). Collisions in
Voxelyze are detected and resolved in an exhaustive pair-
wise comparison of all n surface voxels, with time com-
plexity O (n2). In voxcraft-sim, collisions are handled using
a bounding volume hierarchy (BVH) tree data structure with
O (n log n).

[PAGE 24] Organisms (Ciliated, Pink Voxels).

[0309] The mature swimming organisms, which are com-
posed of thousands of living cells, are simulated by hundreds
of pink colored voxels (FIGS. 8A, 9F-H, 15). Each pink
voxel thus approximates a section of tissue, rather than a
one-to-one voxel-to-cell representation. The aggregate
(metachronal wave) force produced by a patch of beating
cilia was modeled on each surface voxel as an impulse force
originating at the center of the voxel and pointing in any
direction in the horizontal (x,y) plane. The vertical (z)
moments and forces of a simulated organism's pink voxels
are locked in plane to stabilize their movement and remove
the possibility of persistent tumbling behavior in silico.
Tumbling sometimes does briefly occur in wild type recon-
figurable organisms, but they tend to glide with a constant
dorsoventral orientation.

[PAGE 24] Dissociated Stem Cells (Adhesive, Green Voxels).

[0310] Dissociated stem cells are simulated as dissociated
(beamless) voxel singletons and are colored green. When
two green voxels collide with each other, a new semi-
permanent beam is created to bond them together. The beam
is semi-permanent because it is breakable under conditions
that are described below. Green voxels do not have cilia and,
unlike pink voxels of the mature organisms, green voxels are
free to move and rotate vertically as well as horizontally
when hit. In an earlier draft of the model, we simulated
dissociated stem cells with negative buoyancy so that they
would settle to the bottom of the dish, as observed in vivo.
However, simulated adhesion under negative buoyancy
almost always resulted in flat planes of voxels connected
along the surface plane at the bottom of the dish. The model
was therefore adjusted so that stem cells were simulated
with neutral buoyancy. That is, without collision forces

[PAGE 25] Hyperparameters.

[0313] Parameters of the model were estimated from biol-
ogy according to Table 1. Both the mature organisms' tissue
(pink voxels) and the dissociated stem cells (green voxels)
were simulated with Young's modulus of 0.05 MPa, density
1000 kg/m^3, and 0.5 Poisson's ratio. These material prop-
erties of the voxels were manually adjusted for simulation
speed. (Heavier/softer material can be stably simulated with
a larger time step of numerical integration because their
resonance frequency is lower than light/stiff material.) These
properties were kept constant across the two material types
to minimize instantaneous changes in dynamics when piles
of stem cells develop into ciliated organisms. The develop-
ment of adhesive, compacting stem cells into the mature
tissue of a swimming organism is detailed in the following
section. 

[PAGE 25] 2.2. Self Replication in Silico.
Filial Generations.

[PAGE 26] 3. The Al design tools. This
section describes how parameters of reconfigurable organ-
isms, and their environment, can be adjusted to generate a
desired amount of kinematic self replication in reconfigur-
able organisms. 3.1. Controllability of reconfigurable organ-
isms. Individual behavior. Previous work (10) used an
evolutionary algorithm to automatically design the overall
shape, and distributions of epidermal and cardiac tissues, of
deciliated reconfigurable organisms, so that they would
exhibit some desired behavior such as surface-based loco-
motion in a specified direction. Behavior generated in simu-
lation was observed in some of the manufactured organisms
because cardiac-driven movement was sufficiently deter-
mined by geometry and tissue distribution. The behavior of
the cilia-driven swimming organisms manufactured here, in
contrast, are not as obviously determined by their geometry:
very similarly shaped bodies can move very differently.
Even a single organism can exhibit diverse movement
patterns driven by spontaneous transitions in cilia beating
patterns, rather than traveling along a single trajectory as
when driven by a regular cardiac pulse. Collective Behavior.
Predicting cilia-driven movement of an individual organism
is challenging. But some collective behaviors do appear to
be predictable in simulation. Specifically, it was found that
when a swarm of ciliated reconfigurable organisms are
placed together in the same dish amid debris [carmine dye
particles (10) or silicone coated iron oxide beads (9)], they
tend to reliably aggregate the initially scattered debris into
piles. Previous modeling studies (9) assessed whether body
shape could affect pile size in silico under precisely tuned
movement trajectories (a custom set of static cilia forces was
optimized for each swarm to increase pile size). The data
suggested that some body shapes were capable of building
significantly larger piles than others, but this hypothesis was
not verified in vivo. And because the simulated debris were
intended to model synthetic material, piles of debris did not
develop into child organisms. In previous implementations
of dynamic voxel attachment, piles were only numerically
stable if inertial forces were heavily overdamped post-
attachment, resulting in heavy, irregularly-shaped masses of
tangled voxels that could not stably locomote using cilia
impulse forces. The "debris" in this present work, instead,
are dissociated stem cells that, when pushed together into a
sufficiently large pile, compact and develop into a ciliated
organism (offspring) capable of swimming and pushing
together loose stem cells into additional piles (which can
then develop into yet additional offspring). The control
problem is thus to adjust the amount of self

[0319] replication produced by the swarm without know-
ing exactly how the individual organisms will move. 3.2.
Increasing the amount of self replication. There are various
adjustable parameters of the self reproducing system that
can be manually tuned or tuned by an evolutionary algo-
rithm (Table 1) to affect the amount of self replication. Some
of these conditions are strict and non-adjustable. Contami-
nation, for instance, must be avoided or viability will be lost
between rounds of replication. Likewise, a suitable tempera-
ture range for frog embryos and ex vivo tissues/cells must be
maintained in vitro (4° C. to 28° C.). Other conditions are
more adjustable. For instance, the size of the petri dish and
the number of organisms could be changed. The size of the
manually constructed organisms are all 400-600 microns in
diameter (FIG. 14), but can be made larger or smaller (FIG.
12). The adherence properties of the dissociated stem cells
could be altered through the expression of cadherins or
integrins. Reconfigurable organisms live for 10 to 14 days
from the energy preloaded in their cells; but they can survive
for at least three months in a nutrient rich medium (9). The
speed at which the organisms can move during their life-
times can be throttled by increasing or decreasing the
viscosity of their aqueous environment and the friction of
the arena substrate. The structure of the bottom surface or
walls of the dish can channel and/or constrain the otherwise
unpredictable movement of cilia-driven reconfigurable
organisms (9). Finally, the morphology of the organisms can
affect how they interact with other objects and with each
other (9,10). This inherent sensitivity of kinematic self
replication to adjustable external conditions exposes several
potential control parameters that can be set by a human
operator or automatic control system. Here, we focus on two
such parameters: the shape of the organisms and the struc-
ture of the terrain on which they operate. Body shape. The
initial swarm of reconfigurable organisms (FO), which are
formed by manually deconstructing one-day old Xenopus
embryos, naturally compact into spheroids due to cell adher-
ence (referred to here as "wild type"), but they can be carved
into other shapes by subtraction (FIG. 12F,H). The wild type
FO spheroids are here modeled as a vertical stack of five
circular layers of 21, 37, 45, 37, and 21 voxels, respectively,
yielding a voxelized spheroid composed of 161 voxels with
a 7:5 width:height aspect ratio (FIG. 15). Other body shapes
can be formed by removing one or more of the 161 voxels
in a single simulated spheroid. For simplicity, each of the N
organisms within a swarm were constrained to share the
same body shape. Terrain (black voxels). The terrain of a
simulated petri dish can be modified by adding fixed struc-
tures along the bottom surface of the dish, in the form of
black voxels. Because the simulated organisms cannot move
over or through the fixed structures, the terrain can channel
the random movement of the organisms along more predict-
able trajectories within predefined limits. Details of the two
experiments modifying body shape and terrain, respectively,
are identical unless stated otherwise. Encoding shape. A
structure made of voxels (whether body shape or terrain) can
be encoded as a network that takes as input a set of
regularly-spaced coordinates within a bounding volume of
fixed size, and outputs whether or not a voxel is present at
each of those

[0320] required to observe piling behavior occurring in
silico, elastic boundaries were implemented which nudge
the organisms back toward the dissociated stem cells in the
center of the dish. Hyperparameters. Parameters of the
model were estimated from biology according to Table 1.
Both the mature organisms' tissue (pink voxels) and the
dissociated stem cells (green voxels) were simulated with
Young's modulus of 0.05 MPa, density 1000 kg/m^3, and
0.5 Poisson's ratio. These material properties of the voxels
were manually adjusted for simulation speed. (Heavier/
softer material can be stably simulated with a larger time
step of numerical integration because their resonance fre-
quency is lower than light/stiff material.) These properties
were kept constant across the two material types to minimize
instantaneous changes in dynamics when piles of stem cells
develop into ciliated organisms. The development of adhe-
sive, compacting stem cells into the mature tissue of a
swimming organism is detailed in the following section. 2.2.
Self replication in silico. Filial generations. A swarm of N
parent organisms (ciliated pink voxels) were placed amid a
uniform lattice of suspended dissociated stem cells (adhe-
sive green voxels). These initial N parents are here referred
to as filial generation zero (FO). In the main experiments,
there are nine simulated FO organisms (N=9). Each filial
generation, parents swam for three seconds with random
cilia impulse forces, where the x,y cilia force for each
surface voxel, in Newtons, was drawn from a bivariate

[PAGE 26] 
shape, and distributions of epidermal and cardiac tissues, of
deciliated reconfigurable organisms, so that they would
exhibit some desired behavior such as surface-based loco-
motion in a specified direction. Behavior generated in simu-
lation was observed in some of the manufactured organisms
because cardiac-driven movement was sufficiently deter-
mined by geometry and tissue distribution. The behavior of
the cilia-driven swimming organisms manufactured here, in
contrast, are not as obviously determined by their geometry:
very similarly shaped bodies can move very differently.
Even a single organism can exhibit diverse movement
patterns driven by spontaneous transitions in cilia beating
patterns, rather than traveling along a single trajectory as
when driven by a regular cardiac pulse. Collective Behavior.
Predicting cilia-driven movement of an individual organism
is challenging. But some collective behaviors do appear to
be predictable in simulation. Specifically, it was found that
when a swarm of ciliated reconfigurable organisms are
placed together in the same dish amid debris [carmine dye
particles (10) or silicone coated iron oxide beads (9)], they
tend to reliably aggregate the initially scattered debris into
piles. Previous modeling studies (9) assessed whether body
shape could affect pile size in silico under precisely tuned
movement trajectories (a custom set of static cilia forces was
optimized for each swarm to increase pile size). The data
suggested that some body shapes were capable of building
significantly larger piles than others, but this hypothesis was
not verified in vivo. And because the simulated debris were
intended to model synthetic material, piles of debris did not
develop into child organisms. In previous implementations
of dynamic voxel attachment, piles were only numerically
stable if inertial forces were heavily overdamped post-
attachment, resulting in heavy, irregularly-shaped masses of
tangled voxels that could not stably locomote using cilia
impulse forces. The "debris" in this present work, instead,
are dissociated stem cells that, when pushed together into a
sufficiently large pile, compact and develop into a ciliated
organism (offspring) capable of swimming and pushing
together loose stem cells into additional piles (which can
then develop into yet additional offspring). The control
problem is thus to adjust the amount of self

[PAGE 26]
replication produced by the swarm without know-
ing exactly how the individual organisms will move. 3.2.
Increasing the amount of self replication. There are various
adjustable parameters of the self reproducing system that
can be manually tuned or tuned by an evolutionary algo-
rithm (Table 1) to affect the amount of self replication. Some
of these conditions are strict and non-adjustable. Contami-
nation, for instance, must be avoided or viability will be lost
between rounds of replication. Likewise, a suitable tempera-
ture range for frog embryos and ex vivo tissues/cells must be
maintained in vitro (4° C. to 28° C.). Other conditions are
more adjustable. For instance, the size of the petri dish and
the number of organisms could be changed. The size of the
manually constructed organisms are all 400-600 microns in
diameter (FIG. 14), but can be made larger or smaller (FIG.
12). The adherence properties of the dissociated stem cells
could be altered through the expression of cadherins or
integrins. Reconfigurable organisms live for 10 to 14 days
from the energy preloaded in their cells; but they can survive
for at least three months in a nutrient rich medium (9). The
speed at which the organisms can move during their life-
times can be throttled by increasing or decreasing the
viscosity of their aqueous environment and the friction of
the arena substrate. The structure of the bottom surface or
walls of the dish can channel and/or constrain the otherwise
unpredictable movement of cilia-driven reconfigurable
organisms (9). Finally, the morphology of the organisms can
affect how they interact with other objects and with each
other (9,10). This inherent sensitivity of kinematic self
replication to adjustable external conditions exposes several
potential control parameters that can be set by a human
operator or automatic control system. Here, we focus on two
such parameters: the shape of the organisms and the struc-
ture of the terrain on which they operate. Body shape. The
initial swarm of reconfigurable organisms (FO), which are
formed by manually deconstructing one-day old Xenopus
embryos, naturally compact into spheroids due to cell adher-
ence (referred to here as "wild type"), but they can be carved
into other shapes by subtraction (FIG. 12F,H). The wild type
FO spheroids are here modeled as a vertical stack of five
circular layers of 21, 37, 45, 37, and 21 voxels, respectively,
yielding a voxelized spheroid composed of 161 voxels with
a 7:5 width:height aspect ratio (FIG. 15). Other body shapes
can be formed by removing one or more of the 161 voxels
in a single simulated spheroid. For simplicity, each of the N
organisms within a swarm were constrained to share the
same body shape. Terrain (black voxels). The terrain of a
simulated petri dish can be modified by adding fixed struc-
tures along the bottom surface of the dish, in the form of
black voxels. Because the simulated organisms cannot move
over or through the fixed structures, the terrain can channel
the random movement of the organisms along more predict-
able trajectories within predefined limits. Details of the two
experiments modifying body shape and terrain, respectively,
are identical unless stated otherwise. Encoding shape. A
structure made of voxels (whether body shape or terrain) can
be encoded as a network that takes as input a set of
regularly-spaced coordinates within a bounding volume of
fixed size, and outputs whether or not a voxel is present at
each of those

[PAGE 27]
required to observe piling behavior occurring in
silico, elastic boundaries were implemented which nudge
the organisms back toward the dissociated stem cells in the
center of the dish. Hyperparameters. Parameters of the
model were estimated from biology according to Table 1.
Both the mature organisms' tissue (pink voxels) and the
dissociated stem cells (green voxels) were simulated with
Young's modulus of 0.05 MPa, density 1000 kg/m^3, and
0.5 Poisson's ratio. These material properties of the voxels
were manually adjusted for simulation speed. (Heavier/
softer material can be stably simulated with a larger time
step of numerical integration because their resonance fre-
quency is lower than light/stiff material.) These properties
were kept constant across the two material types to minimize
instantaneous changes in dynamics when piles of stem cells
develop into ciliated organisms. The development of adhe-
sive, compacting stem cells into the mature tissue of a
swimming organism is detailed in the following section. 2.2.
Self replication in silico. Filial generations. A swarm of N
parent organisms (ciliated pink voxels) were placed amid a
uniform lattice of suspended dissociated stem cells (adhe-
sive green voxels). These initial N parents are here referred
to as filial generation zero (FO). In the main experiments,
there are nine simulated FO organisms (N=9). Each filial
generation, parents swam for three seconds with random
cilia impulse forces, where the x,y cilia force for each
surface voxel, in Newtons, was drawn from a bivariate
uniform distribution from (-0.3,-0.3) to (0.3,0.3). These
cilia forces are held constant, relative to the orientation of
the voxel, for one second of simulation time (4676 time
steps), yielding ballistic swimming trajectories. After every
second of simulation time, all of the cilia forces were
replaced by new random values, resulting in three indepen-
dent random trajectories of collective swimming behavior.
As simulated parents swim along the surface of the dish,
they collide with the simulated dissociated stem cells, which
adhere into piles of stem cells that slowly compact together.
At the end of their three second evaluation period, parents
were removed from the simulation and the piles were
allowed to compact and spherify for an additional 0.5
seconds of 2 simulation time. The size of the largest pile was
then compared against a threshold of 108 voxels, two-thirds
the size of the unsculpted, 161-voxel FO spheres. Piles
smaller than the threshold (less than 108 voxels) were
removed from simulation, and piles larger than the threshold
(if any) develop instantaneously into child organisms with
cilia (green voxels become pink voxels) (FIG. 15). This first
set of organisms assembled by the FO parents are referred to
as the first filial generation (F1). Empty space in the dish
surrounding the F1 organisms (due to the removal of parents
and small piles below the threshold) is repopulated by a
fresh grid of dissociated stem cells, and a new 3.5 second
evaluation period begins in which the F1 organisms are the
pile-building parents. The F1 organisms may build piles, the
largest of which may develop into F2 organisms, which in
turn may build piles of their own, and so on. The simulation
ends when no parents (pink voxels) remain in the dish, or
after a maximum of five filial generations (F5) elapse, for at
most 6*3.5-21 seconds.
Hyperparameters.

[PAGE 27]
The behavior of each filial generation was simu-
lated for 16,366 time steps (just long enough to see pile-
making behavior occur), with step size 2.14×10-4 sec (just
low enough to ensure simulation stability; for details see
(40)), yielding an evaluation period of 3.5 simulation sec-
onds. Table 1 details how these simulated dynamics corre-
spond to properties of the physical self-replicating system,
in vivo.
3. The AI Design Tools.

[PAGE 27]
This section describes how parameters of recon-
figurable organisms, and their environment, can be adjusted
to generate a desired amount of kinematic self replication in
reconfigurable organisms.
3.1. Controllability of Reconfigurable Organisms.
Individual Behavior.

[PAGE 27]
Previous work (10) used an evolutionary algorithm
to automatically design the overall shape, and distributions
of epidermal and cardiac tissues, of deciliated reconfigurable
organisms, so that they would exhibit some desired behavior
such as surface-based locomotion in a specified direction.
Behavior generated in simulation was observed in some of
the manufactured organisms because cardiac-driven move-
ment was sufficiently determined by geometry and tissue
distribution. The behavior of the cilia-driven swimming
organisms manufactured here, in contrast, are not as obvi-
ously determined by their geometry: very similarly shaped
bodies can move very differently. Even a single organism
can exhibit diverse movement patterns driven by spontane-
ous transitions in cilia beating patterns, rather than traveling
along a single trajectory as when driven by a regular cardiac
pulse.
Collective Behavior.

[PAGE 27]
Predicting cilia-driven movement of an individual
organism is challenging. But some collective behaviors do
appear to be predictable in simulation. Specifically, it was
found that when a swarm of ciliated reconfigurable organ-
isms are placed together in the same dish amid debris
[carmine dye particles (10) or silicone coated iron oxide
beads (9)], they tend to reliably aggregate the initially
scattered debris into piles. Previous modeling studies (9)
assessed whether body shape could affect pile size in silico
under precisely tuned movement trajectories (a custom set of
static cilia forces was optimized for each swarm to increase
pile size). The data suggested that some body shapes were
capable of building significantly larger piles than others, but
this hypothesis was not verified in vivo. And because the
simulated debris were intended to model synthetic material,
piles of debris did not develop into child organisms. In
previous implementations of dynamic voxel attachment,
piles were only numerically stable if inertial forces were
heavily overdamped post-attachment, resulting in heavy,
irregularly-shaped masses of tangled voxels that could not
stably locomote using cilia impulse forces.

[PAGE 27]
The "debris" in this present work, instead, are
dissociated stem cells that, when pushed together into a
sufficiently large pile, compact and develop into a ciliated
organism (offspring) capable of swimming and pushing
together loose stem cells into additional piles (which can
then develop into yet additional offspring). The control
problem is thus to adjust the amount of self replication
produced by the swarm without knowing exactly how the
individual organisms will move.
3.2. Increasing the Amount of Self Replication.

[PAGE 27]
There are various adjustable parameters of the self
reproducing system that can be manually tuned or tuned by
an evolutionary algorithm (Table 1) to affect the amount of
self replication. Some of these conditions are strict and
non-adjustable. Contamination, for instance, must be
avoided or viability will be lost between rounds of replica-
tion. Likewise, a suitable temperature range for frog
embryos and ex vivo tissues/cells must be maintained in
vitro (4° C. to 28° C.). Other conditions are more adjustable.
For instance, the size of the petri dish and the number of
organisms could be changed. The size of the manually
constructed organisms are all 400-600 microns in diameter
(FIG. 14), but can be made larger or smaller (FIG. 12). The
adherence properties of the dissociated stem cells could be
altered through the expression of cadherins or integrins.
Reconfigurable organisms live for 10 to 14 days from the
energy preloaded in their cells; but they can survive for at
least three months in a nutrient rich medium (9). The speed
at which the organisms can move during their lifetimes can
be throttled by increasing or decreasing the viscosity of their
aqueous environment and the friction of the arena substrate.
The structure of the bottom surface or walls of the dish can
channel and/or constrain the otherwise unpredictable move-
ment of cilia-driven reconfigurable organisms (9). Finally,

[PAGE 28]
the morphology of the organisms can affect how they
interact with other objects and with each other (9,10). This
inherent sensitivity of kinematic self replication to adjust-
able external conditions exposes several potential control
parameters that can be set by a human operator or automatic
control system. Here, we focus on two such parameters: the
shape of the organisms and the structure of the terrain on
which they operate.
Body Shape.

[PAGE 28]
The initial swarm of reconfigurable organisms
(F0), which are formed by manually deconstructing one-day
old Xenopus embryos, naturally compact into spheroids due
to cell adherence (referred to here as "wild type"), but they
can be carved into other shapes by subtraction (FIG. 12F,H).
The wild type FO spheroids are here modeled as a vertical
stack of five circular layers of 21, 37, 45, 37, and 21 voxels,
respectively, yielding a voxelized spheroid composed of 161
voxels with a 7:5 width:height aspect ratio (FIG. 15). Other
body shapes can be formed by removing one or more of the
161 voxels in a single simulated spheroid. For simplicity,
each of the N organisms within a swarm were constrained to
share the same body shape.
Terrain (Black Voxels).

[PAGE 28]
The terrain of a simulated petri dish can be modi-
fied by adding fixed structures along the bottom surface of
the dish, in the form of black voxels. Because the simulated
organisms cannot move over or through the fixed structures,
the terrain can channel the random movement of the organ-
isms along more predictable trajectories within predefined
limits. Details of the two experiments modifying body shape
and terrain, respectively, are identical unless stated other-
wise.
Encoding Shape.

[PAGE 28]
A structure made of voxels (whether body shape or
terrain) can be encoded as a network that takes as input a set
of regularly-spaced coordinates within a bounding volume
of fixed size, and outputs whether or not a voxel is present
at each of those three-dimensional locations. Consistent with
previous computational models of reconfigurable organisms
(10), a feedforward Compositional Pattern-Producing Net-
work, or CPPN (39), was used to encode voxel structures. A
CPPN consists of vertices connected by weighted edges.
Each edge multiplies its input value by a real valued weight
between-1 and 1. Each vertex sums the values of its input
edges and outputs a function applied to that sum. The
function encoded in a node is drawn from the following set:
sine, signum, square, absolute value, square root of the
absolute value; and the negations of those five functions. In
the last layer of the network, positive output values corre-
spond to present voxels and negative values correspond to
empty space (an additional signum function is applied). The
largest connected component of voxels was taken to be the
structure. Alteration to edge weights and/or changes in
node-encoded functions alters the structure output by the
network. For more details, see (69).

[PAGE 28]
When encoding body shape, for the main experi-
ments within a flat petri dish, networks were restricted to
removing vertical columns of voxels along the z axis, at
particular positions in (x,y), from the default spheroid, rather
than removing individual voxels. This ensured that, if a
simulated shape were to be instantiated as a physical recon-
figurable organism, organisms could be rapidly shaped using
coarse subtraction, instead of sculpting intricate 3D con-
cavities into each one (10). Similarly, when encoding terrain,
only one-voxel tall structures (z=0) were considered so that
all of the immovable black voxels rested on the bottom of
the dish. Thus, in both cases, only the x and y coordinates
need to be input to the encoding network.
Measuring the Amount of Self Replication.

[PAGE 28]
The amount of self replication achieved by a spe-
cific body shape or terrain can be measured by the number
of filial generations (g) they generate. The fitness, f, of a
CPPN is computed as:
f = s/p + g,
(Eqn. 1)
where s is the size of the largest pile (the number of voxels
it contains) at the end of the evaluation period; p is the pile
size threshold required for a pile to develop into an organism
(if s is greater than p, a new filial generation begins,
otherwise the evaluation period ends); and g is the number
of filial generations achieved. A conservative threshold
(s=108 voxels) of two-thirds the size of the simulated wild
type spheres (161 voxels) was selected such that relatively
few randomly generated swarms achieved g>0. This signifi-
cantly reduced the computational effort required to find
viable terrains and body shapes that increase the amount of
self replication. It also matched the observation that physical
swarms composed of the wild type spheroids usually only
managed one generation of replication.
Optimization Algorithm.

[PAGE 28]
CPPNs were optimized to output replicator shapes,
or terrains, that cause more self replication than that
observed in the wild type spheroids. An evolutionary algo-
rithm was used because the authors have considerable
experience using this particular algorithm to evolve soft
robots and reconfigurable organisms in previous work.
Many optimization methods could be adapted for optimizing
CPPNs, but derivative-free optimization methods such as
evolutionary algorithms are a natural choice for this problem
because the relationship between behavior and morphology
was modeled using a nondifferentiable physical simulator.
More specifically, low self replicative ability cannot yet be
localized to specific missing parts of specific piles. These
missing pile parts in turn cannot yet be propagated back
through the physical simulator to implicate movement pat-
terns of specific swarm members, and back further to
specific parts of the replicators' bodies causing those move-
ments. Finally, implicated body parts cannot be propagated
back further into the CPPN, to implicate specific edges and
nodes that should be tuned to rectify the low replicative
ability. In addition, evolutionary rather than learning algo-
rithms are desirable because initial conditions of the system
(body shapes, terrains) are optimized here, rather than
optimizing the control of each organism.

[PAGE 28]
The evolutionary algorithm used here is a multi-
objective optimization algorithm (38) that continuously
injects new design alternatives into the population, and
reduces selection pressure on newer designs, in order to

[PAGE 29]
favor the evolution of new, different ways to achieve self
replication. Each independent evolutionary trial starts with
its own unique set of 16 initially random CPPNs, and a
sequence of random (but static) cilia forces (described in
Sect. S2.1). Each CPPN is translated into a swarm, or a
terrain for the default swarm of spheroids. The swarm is
simulated and its self replicative ability is measured. A
modified copy is made of all 16 CPPNs in the population,
and each copy inherits the lineage age of its parent CPPN.
A mutation adds, removes, or modifies one of the network's
edges or vertices. Vertex modification involves replacing the
activation function currently encoded there with a function
randomly selected from the following set: sine, signum,
square, absolute value, square root of the absolute value. The
age of each of the 32 CPPNs is incremented by one, and one
new CPPN with a lineage age of zero is randomly generated.
The 17 new swarms produced by the 17 new CPPNs are
evaluated in silico, as described in Sect. S2.2. Then, the
entire population of 16±17=33 CPPNs are then sorted, on
the basis of their age and fitness scores (Eqn. 1), into Pareto
fronts. The first Pareto front consists of the youngest and
most fit CPPNs, which are by definition nondominated. The
second Pareto front consists of CPPNs that are dominated by
at least one CPPN in the first front, but are not dominated by
any other CPPNs. The N-th front consists of CPPNs that are
dominated only by CPPNs the preceding N-1 fronts. Starting
with the first Pareto front, successive fronts are kept in their
entirety until doing so would overfill the population past its
original size, 16 CPPNs, at which point CPPNs are added
stochastically with probability proportional to their fitness
until the population contains 16 CPPNs.

[PAGE 29]
When evolving body shape, 49 independent evo-
lutionary trials were conducted. Each evolutionary trial
started with its own unique set of random shape-encoding
CPPNs and sets of random cilia forces, yielding 49 cham-
pion swarms: the body shape that achieved the highest value
of Eqn. 1 above, in each trial.

[PAGE 29]
Runtime. Each evolutionary trial was conducted
using eight NVIDIA Tesla V100s for a maximum of 48
hours wall-clock time or 500 updates of the CPPN popula-
tion (whichever came first). The runtime varies due to the
algorithm's stochasticity; some swarms produce more filial
generations than others and thus require more time to
simulate. Because evaluating swarms in simulation is the
computational bottleneck, the algorithm is readily paralleliz-
able: doubling the number of GPUs would allow halving the
wall-clock time for the same population size, or doubling the
size of the CPPN population that can be evaluated using the
same amount of wall-clock time.
3.3. Inhibiting and Recovering Self Replication.

[PAGE 29]
A simple way to stop kinematic self replication is
to stop supplying the system with additional building mate-
rials (here, dissociated stem cells). This is one of the reasons
that

[PAGE 29]
kinematic self replication is inherently more con-
trollable than the other nine known forms of biological
replication. Another way to slow or halt a kinematic self-
replicator is to impede its movement in a cluttered environ-
ment.
Cluttered Environment.

[PAGE 29]
To investigate whether the evolutionary algorithm
could impart self replication to a system otherwise incapable
of it, a cluttered environment was created by attaching a
sparse uniform grid of immovable black voxels to the
bottom of the dish (FIG. 20). The simulated wild type
reconfigurable organisms could no longer spontaneously
self-replicate in this environment because their movement is
contained within a small region surrounding their starting
position (FIG. 20A). However, if sections are removed from
the simulated organisms' ventral surfaces, they can glide
over the top of the static debris (FIG. 20B-D). The challenge
here is to not only regain movement, but to recover self
replication. This requires carving away voxels on the ventral
surface of a body shape while retaining the ability to capture
and aggregate dissociated cells into piles. Thus, instead of
carving away entire columns at a time (which simplifies
manufacture), independent removal of any voxel within the
sphere was permitted.
4. Statistical Analysis.
4.1. Size of Offspring.
In Silico.

[PAGE 29]
Five hundred simulations were conducted in which
two groups the wild type spheroids and the evolved semi-
toroids built piles. In each simulation, the swarm moved
differently, as each member was driven by different random
cilia forces. The simulations were terminated before any
piles could develop into F1 organisms. The null hypothesis
is that the average size of the piles built by the spheroids was
no different from the size of those built by the optimized
shape (the semi-torus). Because the same random cilia
forces were used for the spheres and the evolved shape, the
two samples are dependent. Thus, a Wilcoxon test was
performed, resulting in p=3.9*10-5 (W=6311.5). Control-
ling for false discovery rate, the null hypothesis is rejected
at the 0.0001 level of significance.
In Vivo.

[PAGE 29]
The sizes of the 10 largest physical F1 offspring
generated by each of eight different swarms was recorded.
Five of the swarms were composed of wild type spheroids,
one was composed of spheroids double the size, and one was
composed of flattened spheroids (gray points in FIG. 9E).
Each swarm behaved within a dish with differing dissociated
cell density. The sizes of the 10 largest physical F1 offspring
generated by each of three additional swarms, composed of
the automatically designed semitoroid, were also recorded,
again at different dissociated cell densities (pink points in
FIG. 9E). Within each set of 10, the size of the offspring was
divided by the cell density in which they were built. The null
hypothesis is that the average diameter of the offspring
(normalized by cell concentration) built by semitoroids
progenitors across three independent trials was no different
than the average diameter of the offspring built across five
independent trials by the wild type spheroids or spheroid
variants. Comparing offspring size in this way is a conser-
vative test since the volumetric difference between two
spheres is eight times as large as their corresponding dif-
ference in diameter. A Mann Whitney U test was performed,
resulting in p=0.0368 (U=1.0). Controlling for false discov-
ery rate, the null hypothesis is rejected at the 0.05 level of
significance.
4.2. Number of Generations.
In Silico.

[PAGE 30]
The 49 evolutionary trials resulted in progenitor
shapes that self-replicated for two to three generations in
silico, under strict conditions: a pile size threshold of two
thirds the number of voxels contained within the simulated
wild type spheres. Two thirds is a strict threshold because the
best estimate is closer to one fourth (see Table 1). All 49
trials were compared to evaluations of spheres. The wild
type spheres did not self replicate for more than a single
generation, in any of the 49 trials. Bootstrapped confidence
intervals of the 49 best swarms from each trial were com-
pared against 49 of the wild type spheroid swarms to
determine the probability of overlap (FIG. 17A). Controlling
for false discovery rate the null hypothesis is rejected at the
0.0001 level of significance.

[PAGE 30]
The same procedure was performed for terrain
optimization with wild type spheroid swarms in silico (FIG.
18). The null hypothesis is that of no difference in the
number of filial generations produced by swarms operating
on the best evolved terrains (e.g. FIG. 19) and those oper-
ating on the flat surface plane of a standard petri dish (e.g.
FIG. 15). Based on the bootstrapped confidence intervals,
and controlling for false discovery rate, the null hypothesis
is rejected at the 0.0001 level of significance.
In Vivo.

[PAGE 30]
The wild type reconfigurable organisms produced
just a single filial generation in four of the five independent
trials. The only trial to produce two generations of offspring
required the highest cell concentration we tested (150 cells/
mm²). In the first of three self replication trials using the
optimized body shape (semitoroids) resulted in two genera-
tions at 61 cells/mm² but then degraded into immobility due
to a fungal infection. In the second and third trials using the
optimized body shape, additional precautions were taken to
avoid fungal infections. Three successive generations of
offspring were produced at 61 cells/mm²; four successive
generations of offspring were produced at 91 cells/mm². The
null hypothesis is that the number of generations of self
replication achieved by the optimized design (2 g, 3 g, 4 g)
was no greater than the number of generations produced by
the wild type spheroids (1 g, 1 g, 1 g, 1 g, 2 g). A Mann
Whitney U test was performed: p=0.0188. (U=0.5). Con-
trolling for false discovery rate, the null hypothesis is
rejected at the 0.05 level of significance.
4.3. Correlation Between First Generation Size and Total
Number of Generations in Vivo.

[PAGE 30]
There was a Spearman rank-order correlation coef-
ficient of 0.9322 (p=0.00074) between the number of rep-
lication generations achieved and the aggregate size of the
10 largest first generation offspring.
5. Utility Forecast.

[PAGE 30]
A computational model was created to predict the
amount of utility (useful work) the self-replicating swarm
may be capable of, if it was provided with reachable but
unassembled parts in a semi-structured environment. To that
end, a circuit completion task was chosen. This section
details how the parameters were estimated for the self-
replicating swarm and the electronic parts. The model incor-
porates many biological details from the physical reconfig-
urable organisms reported here, and from emerging
microscale electronic components. But, many of the details
estimated in the model will be refined when more is known
about how such organisms can or cannot interact with
various microscale environments containing artificial mate-
rials. This will, in future, yield better forecasts of the
potential utility of this technology.
5.1. Circuit Components.

[PAGE 30]
Three types of modular microelectronic compo-
nents were simulated: light emitters, batteries, and wire.
Each component contains vertically stacked and insulated
conductors, which maintains connectability under transla-
tional and rotational movement in plane (FIG. 22C-E). That
is, the electronic components, if resting on a surface plane,
can be pushed together and connected by a swarm of
reconfigurable organisms that move along the same surface.
The simulated wires (blue voxels in FIG. 22A) adhere to
each other upon collision like the simulated dissociated stem
cells do (green voxels). Except, once the wires attach, they
do not detach (there is no stochastic spherification as in the
stem cells). Current emanates from a power source that
could, if instantiated physically, be supplied by a microbat-
tery or electrodes, and is approximated in simulation by
passing discrete packets of voltage along neighboring voxels
in a chain of connected voxels. If a packet of voltage reaches
a light emitter, it is switched on, permanently.

[PAGE 30]
There exist atomically-thin light emitters with light
emission visible to the naked eye that are made of just a few
layers of graphene, stretched across a 2D sheet<5 µM in
length and width and powered at ~0.4 V µm¯¹ (27). Any
organisms gathering and connecting these emitters to a
power supply would have to be removed or sacrificed before
powering the circuit. The number of switched-on light
emitters was chosen here as the unit of "useful work"
performed by a self-replicating swarm, but the choice was
arbitrary. There are other kinds of microscale resistors, such
as transistors, which could be used instead, or any number
of other kinds of microscale inspection, maintenance or
assembly tasks.
5.2. Estimated Utility.
Task Environment.

[PAGE 30]
Sixteen initially disconnected strips of vertically
stacked and insulated conductive voxels ("wires"; blue
voxels) are spread out along the edge of the soft boundary
of a simulated dish (FIGS. 11 and 22). In each corner, two
of the strips are connected at a 90 degree angle to a small
light emitter (white voxels). Two of the remaining eight
strips along the edge, on opposing sides, are attached to
power supplies. Nine reconfigurable organisms are placed in
the center of the simulated dish amid a grid of dissociated
stem cells. Twelve additional strips of vertically-insulated
conductive voxels are placed among them, randomly ori-
ented north-south or east-west with equal probability (FIG.
11B,C). Potential current flow is shown in yellow propagat-
ing down blue conductive voxels connected to a power
supply. As organisms move in their dish, they self replicate
(by building piles out of dissociated stem cells) and, simul-
taneously, snap together the conductive strips of voxels in
the dish as a side effect of movement. If one of the corner

[PAGE 30] 4.2. Number of Generations.

In Silico.

[0341] The 49 evolutionary trials resulted in progenitor shapes that self-replicated for two to three generations in silico, under strict conditions: a pile size threshold of two thirds the number of voxels contained within the simulated wild type spheres. Two thirds is a strict threshold because the best estimate is closer to one fourth (see Table 1). All 49 trials were compared to evaluations of spheres. The wild type spheres did not self replicate for more than a single generation, in any of the 49 trials. Bootstrapped confidence intervals of the 49 best swarms from each trial were compared against 49 of the wild type spheroid swarms to determine the probability of overlap (FIG. 17A). Controlling for false discovery rate the null hypothesis is rejected at the 0.0001 level of significance.

[0342] The same procedure was performed for terrain optimization with wild type spheroid swarms in silico (FIG. 18). The null hypothesis is that of no difference in the number of filial generations produced by swarms operating on the best evolved terrains (e.g. FIG. 19) and those operating on the flat surface plane of a standard petri dish (e.g. FIG. 15). Based on the bootstrapped confidence intervals, and controlling for false discovery rate, the null hypothesis is rejected at the 0.0001 level of significance.

In Vivo.

[0343] The wild type reconfigurable organisms produced just a single filial generation in four of the five independent trials. The only trial to produce two generations of offspring required the highest cell concentration we tested (150 cells/ mm²). In the first of three self replication trials using the optimized body shape (semitoroids) resulted in two generations at 61 cells/mm² but then degraded into immobility due to a fungal infection. In the second and third trials using the optimized body shape, additional precautions were taken to avoid fungal infections. Three successive generations of offspring were produced at 61 cells/mm²; four successive generations of offspring were produced at 91 cells/mm². The null hypothesis is that the number of generations of self replication achieved by the optimized design (2 g, 3 g, 4 g) was no greater than the number of generations produced by the wild type spheroids (1 g, 1 g, 1 g, 1 g, 2 g). A Mann Whitney U test was performed: p=0.0188. (U=0.5). Controlling for false discovery rate, the null hypothesis is rejected at the 0.05 level of significance.

[PAGE 30] 4.3. Correlation Between First Generation Size and Total Number of Generations in Vivo.

[0344] There was a Spearman rank-order correlation coefficient of 0.9322 (p=0.00074) between the number of replication generations achieved and the aggregate size of the 10 largest first generation offspring.

[PAGE 30] 5. Utility Forecast.

[0345] A computational model was created to predict the amount of utility (useful work) the self-replicating swarm may be capable of, if it was provided with reachable but unassembled parts in a semi-structured environment. To that end, a circuit completion task was chosen. This section details how the parameters were estimated for the self-replicating swarm and the electronic parts. The model incorporates many biological details from the physical reconfigurable organisms reported here, and from emerging microscale electronic components. But, many of the details estimated in the model will be refined when more is known about how such organisms can or cannot interact with various microscale environments containing artificial materials. This will, in future, yield better forecasts of the potential utility of this technology.

[PAGE 30] 5.1. Circuit Components.

[0346] Three types of modular microelectronic components were simulated: light emitters, batteries, and wire. Each component contains vertically stacked and insulated conductors, which maintains connectability under translational and rotational movement in plane (FIG. 22C-E). That is, the electronic components, if resting on a surface plane, can be pushed together and connected by a swarm of reconfigurable organisms that move along the same surface. The simulated wires (blue voxels in FIG. 22A) adhere to each other upon collision like the simulated dissociated stem cells do (green voxels). Except, once the wires attach, they do not detach (there is no stochastic spherification as in the stem cells). Current emanates from a power source that could, if instantiated physically, be supplied by a microbattery or electrodes, and is approximated in simulation by passing discrete packets of voltage along neighboring voxels in a chain of connected voxels. If a packet of voltage reaches a light emitter, it is switched on, permanently.

[0347] There exist atomically-thin light emitters with light emission visible to the naked eye that are made of just a few layers of graphene, stretched across a 2D sheet<5 µM in length and width and powered at ~0.4 V µm¯¹ (27). Any organisms gathering and connecting these emitters to a power supply would have to be removed or sacrificed before powering the circuit. The number of switched-on light emitters was chosen here as the unit of "useful work" performed by a self-replicating swarm, but the choice was arbitrary. There are other kinds of microscale resistors, such as transistors, which could be used instead, or any number of other kinds of microscale inspection, maintenance or assembly tasks.

[PAGE 30] 5.2. Estimated Utility.

Task Environment.

[0348] Sixteen initially disconnected strips of vertically stacked and insulated conductive voxels ("wires"; blue voxels) are spread out along the edge of the soft boundary of a simulated dish (FIGS. 11 and 22). In each corner, two of the strips are connected at a 90 degree angle to a small light emitter (white voxels). Two of the remaining eight strips along the edge, on opposing sides, are attached to power supplies. Nine reconfigurable organisms are placed in the center of the simulated dish amid a grid of dissociated stem cells. Twelve additional strips of vertically-insulated conductive voxels are placed among them, randomly oriented north-south or east-west with equal probability (FIG. 11B,C). Potential current flow is shown in yellow propagating down blue conductive voxels connected to a power supply. As organisms move in their dish, they self replicate (by building piles out of dissociated stem cells) and, simultaneously, snap together the conductive strips of voxels in the dish as a side effect of movement. If one of the corner strips with a light emitter connects by conductive voxels to one of the two power supplies, the light emitter switches on (as indicated by a red circled X in FIGS. 11 and 22).

[0349] The swarm builds piles, which, if sufficiently larger than 40 voxels, develop into offspring, and the dissociated cells are replenished, every 3.5 seconds, as in the above experiments. Forty voxels is one fourth the size of the simulated wild type spheroids, which is the best estimate for the minimum size of piles that developed into self motile offspring in vivo (Table 1). Because utility is measured rather than self replication, the parents are left in the dish and continue building additional filial generations alongside their offspring for 17.5 seconds. As the 3 organisms move they randomly push the circuit components into place, occasionally turning on up to four light emitters. After 17.5 seconds of simulation time, the parents were removed, and the offspring were extracted. To better approximate the spherification that occurs in vivo, offspring extracted from a completed simulation are converted to spheroids containing roughly the same number of voxels. The spherified offspring were then split into two subgroups, each subgroup was injected into one of two new simulated petri dishes, and each new dish contains a new partially-completed circuit. Self replication and circuit building begin afresh in these two dishes, again for 17.5 seconds. This process triggers the growth of a binary simulation tree (FIG. 11) in which each simulation begets at most two simulation branches, each containing one half of the produced offspring of their root simulation. If only a single offspring is created by a swarm after 17.5 seconds, then only one new simulation branch is spawned. If no offspring were built, then that branch of the binary simulation tree dies out.

[PAGE 31] Growth Rate of Utility.

[0350] After 50 simulation bifurcations (875 seconds of simulation time), 5024 light emitters were switched on by the self-replicating swarm.

[0351] Symbolic regression (42) was used to find the degree of a polynomial function that best explains the cumulative number of emitters switched on by the self-replicating swarm. The regression operators were limited to addition and multiplication. The operands were the number of simulation bifurcations (a sequence from 1 to 51), and an ephemeral constant drawn from a gaussian distribution (mu-0, sigma-10). Each candidate solution is evaluated based on its root mean squared error (RMSE) with the cumulative number of emitters switched on at each simulation bifurcation.

[0352] A population of 1000 candidate equations was optimized for 1000 generations using the same optimization algorithm (38) used to design body shapes and terrains. The population size could be set much larger for this experiment because evaluating equations takes milliseconds whereas evaluating self-replicating swarms takes minutes. Ten independent optimization trials were conducted, each starting from a different random set of 1000 candidate equations. The objective is to minimize root mean squared error. After 1000 generations, the least-error equations found in each trial all converged about the quadratic curve derived by ordinary least squares: 2.7x2-43x+182.4, where x is the number of simulation bifurcations (R2=0.9988). The prediction of the model is thus, under the simulated conditions, utility increases quadratically with time.

[0353] Self replication (and thus utility) could, in principle, be enhanced in vivo through numerous bioengineering and molecular interventions, including: altering cell adherence properties (through the expression of cadherins or integrins), increasing cell lifespan with culture media, increasing swimming velocity by altering the number and polarity of cilia, changing cilia beat frequency, generating larger parents, increasing the number of adults during self replication, provision of more feeder cells, altering the size of the arena, and changing the substrate on which self replication occurs (increased or decreased friction). For the current settings of these parameters, and others that could affect the rate of utility produced by future reconfigurable organisms, see Table 1.

[0354] It is clear that, in theory, self-replicative machines that perform useful work as a side effect will superlinearly increase in utility over time. However, it was not clear that there exists a domain in which the randomly-acting self-replicative system described here would be so. The flexible electronics technology simulated here demonstrates that, assuming such technology comes to fruition, there may soon be a domain in which our technology may be superlinearly useful over time.

[PAGE 34] Example 4 Control of Locomotion in Engineered Living Systems

[0424] Biological robots are currently limited by their lack of autonomy: actuation/movement, where available, requires remote controlled stimulation of specific cell populations, and currently no closed loop autonomous systems exist. We have developed a new approach to control movement/behavior in engineered biological robots, through the utilization of motile cilia, small hairlike structures present on the surface of cells which beat in unison to generate fluid flow.

[0425] This new advance in the autonomous control of movement involves the expression of light sensitive optogenetic proteins in motile cilia containing cell populations. These optogenetic proteins "open" and "close" in response to specific wavelengths of light, which in turn changes the charge [voltage] of the cell. In response to voltage changes, the beat frequency of motile cilia increases or decreases, which could directly alter biological robot movement.

[0426] To demonstrate these channels can be used to control cilia beating, and thus robot velocity, we expressed a common optogenetic channel, channelrhodopsin-2 [ChR2], in our biological robots via mRNA microinjection. This channel is "activated" in response to blue light and remains closed at other wavelengths or in darkness. The velocity of 8 individuals were measured over a period of 40 s, with blue light being present only during the latter 20 seconds of observation (FIG. 23A-D), delivered by a SMZ-1500 fluorescent microscope equipped with 467-498 nm filter. Untreated controls showed no change in velocity in response to blue light, however, ChR2 expressing designs showed a significant increase in velocity in response to light stimulus (FIG. 23E, t-test, p=0.0124, n=8 individuals per treatment). These data are the first to show control of cilia beating with light, and that it is thus possible to control the movement of engineered biological robots within aqueous environments.

[0427] In the foregoing description, it will be readily apparent to one skilled in the art that varying substitutions and modifications may be made to the invention disclosed herein without departing from the scope and spirit of the invention. The invention illustratively described herein suitably may be practiced in the absence of any element or elements, limitation or limitations which is not specifically disclosed herein. The terms and expressions which have been employed are used as terms of description and not of limitation, and there is no intention that in the use of such terms and expressions of excluding any equivalents of the features shown and described or portions thereof, but it is recognized that various modifications are possible within the scope of the invention. Thus, it should be understood that although the present invention has been illustrated by specific embodiments and optional features, modification and/ or variation of the concepts herein disclosed may be resorted to by those skilled in the art, and that such modifications and variations are considered to be within the scope of this invention.

[0428] All methods described herein can be performed in any suitable order unless otherwise indicated herein or otherwise clearly contradicted by context. The use of any and all examples provided herein, is intended merely to better illuminate the invention and does not pose a limitation on the scope of the invention unless otherwise claimed.

[0409] 55. Gurdon, J. B., Harger, P., Mitchell, A., Lemaire,
P. Activin signalling and response to a morphogen gradi-
ent. Nature, 371, 487-492 (1994).
[0410] 56. Ariizumi, T., Asashima, M. In Vitro Control of
the Embryonic Form of Xenopus laevis by Activin A:
Time and Dose-Dependent Inducing Properties of
Activin-Treated Ectoderm: (activin/ectoderm/organizer/
Xenopus laevis/neural induction). Development, Growth
& Differentiation, 36, 499-507 (1994).
[0411] 57. Sasai, Y., Lu, B., Piccolo, S., De Robertis, E. M.
Endoderm induction by the organizer-secreted factors
chordin and noggin in Xenopus animal caps. The EMBO
Journal, 15, 4547-4555 (1996). 17
[0412] 58. Miyanaga, Y., Shiurba, R., Asashima, M. Blood
cell induction in Xenopus animal cap explants: effects of
fibroblast growth factor, bone morphogenetic proteins,
and activin. Development Genes and Evolution, 209,
69-76 (1999).
[0413] 59. Ariizumi, T., Takahashi, S., Chan, T. C., Ito, Y.,
Michiue, T., Asashima, M. Isolation and differentiation of
Xenopus animal cap cells. Current Protocols in Stem Cell
Biology, 9, 1D-5 (2009).
[0414] 60. Ariizumi, T., Michiue, T., Asashima, M. In
Vitro Induction of Xenopus Embryonic Organs Using
Animal Cap Cells. Cold Spring Harbor Protocols, pdb-
prot097410 (2017).
[0415] 61. Teegala, S., Chauhan, R., Lei, E., Weinstein, D.
C. Tbx2 is required for the suppression of mesendoderm
during early Xenopus development. Developmental
Dynamics, 247, 903-913 (2018).
[0416] 62. Marnellos, G., Deblandre, G. A., Mjolsness, E.,
Kintner, C. Delta-Notch lateral inhibitory patterning in
the emergence of ciliated cells in Xenopus: experimental
observations and a gene network model. In Biocomputing
2000, 329-340 (1999).
[0417] 63. Stubbs, J. L., Oishi, I., Belmonte, J. C. I.,
Kintner, C. The forkhead protein Foxjl specifies node-like
cilia in Xenopus and zebrafish embryos. Nature Genetics,
40, 1454-1460 (2008).
[0418] 64. Quigley, I. K., Stubbs, J. L., Kintner, C. Speci-
fication of ion transport cells in the Xenopus larval skin.
Development, 138, 705-714 (2011).
[0419] 65. Myers, C. T., Appleby, S. C., Krieg, P. A. Use
of small molecule inhibitors of the Wnt and Notch sig-
naling pathways during Xenopus development. Methods,
66, 380-389 (2014).
[0420] 66. Brooks, E. R., Wallingford, J. B. Multiciliated
cells. Current Biology, 24, R973-R982 (2014).
[0421] 67. Liu, S., Matthews, D., Kriegman, S., Bongard,
J. Voxcraft-sim, a GPU-accelerated voxel-based physics
engine. 10.5281/zenodo.3835152, https://github.com/
voxcraft/voxcraft-sim (2020).
[0422] 68. Karras, T. Maximizing parallelism in the con-
struction of BVHs, octrees, and k-d trees. In Procs. of the
ACM Conf. on High-Performance Graphics, 33-37
(2012).
[0423] 69. Cheney, N., et al. Unshackling evolution:
Evolving soft robots with multiple materials and a pow-
erful generative encoding." In Procs. of the Genetic and
Evolutionary Computation Conf. (2013).

Example 4 Control of Locomotion in Engineered
Living Systems
[0424] Biological robots are currently limited by their lack
of autonomy: actuation/movement, where available,
requires remote controlled stimulation of specific cell popu-
lations, and currently no closed loop autonomous systems
exist. We have developed a new approach to control move-
ment/behavior in engineered biological robots, through the
utilization of motile cilia, small hairlike structures present
on the surface of cells which beat in unison to generate fluid
flow.
[0425] This new advance in the autonomous control of
movement involves the expression of light sensitive opto-
genetic proteins in motile cilia containing cell populations.
These optogenetic proteins "open" and "close" in response
to specific wavelengths of light, which in turn changes the
charge [voltage] of the cell. In response to voltage changes,
the beat frequency of motile cilia increases or decreases,
which could directly alter biological robot movement.
[0426] To demonstrate these channels can be used to
control cilia beating, and thus robot velocity, we expressed
a common optogenetic channel, channelrhodopsin-2
[ChR2], in our biological robots via mRNA microinjection.
This channel is "activated" in response to blue light and
remains closed at other wavelengths or in darkness. The
velocity of 8 individuals were measured over a period of 40
s, with blue light being present only during the latter 20
seconds of observation (FIG. 23A-D), delivered by a SMZ-
1500 fluorescent microscope equipped with 467-498 nm
filter. Untreated controls showed no change in velocity in
response to blue light, however, ChR2 expressing designs
showed a significant increase in velocity in response to light
stimulus (FIG. 23E, t-test, p=0.0124, n=8 individuals per
treatment). These data are the first to show control of cilia
beating with light, and that it is thus possible to control the
movement of engineered biological robots within aqueous
environments.
[0427] In the foregoing description, it will be readily
apparent to one skilled in the art that varying substitutions
and modifications may be made to the invention disclosed
herein without departing from the scope and spirit of the
invention. The invention illustratively described herein suit-
ably may be practiced in the absence of any element or
elements, limitation or limitations which is not specifically
disclosed herein. The terms and expressions which have
been employed are used as terms of description and not of
limitation, and there is no intention that in the use of such
terms and expressions of excluding any equivalents of the
features shown and described or portions thereof, but it is
recognized that various modifications are possible within the
scope of the invention. Thus, it should be understood that
although the present invention has been illustrated by spe-
cific embodiments and optional features, modification and/
or variation of the concepts herein disclosed may be resorted
to by those skilled in the art, and that such modifications and
variations are considered to be within the scope of this
invention.
[0428] All methods described herein can be performed in
any suitable order unless otherwise indicated herein or
otherwise clearly contradicted by context. The use of any
and all examples provided herein, is intended merely to
better illuminate the invention and does not pose a limitation
on the scope of the invention unless otherwise claimed. No