Bioelectricity is a universal multifaced
signaling cue in living organisms
GuangJun Zhanga,*, and Michael Levinb,*
aDepartment of Comparative Pathobiology, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN 47906; bAllen Discovery
Center at Tufts University, Medford, MA 02155

ABSTRACT The cellular electrical signals of living organisms were discovered more than a
century ago and have been extensively investigated in the neuromuscular system. Neuronal
depolarization and hyperpolarization are essential for our neuromuscular physiological and
pathological functions. Bioelectricity is being recognized as an ancient, intrinsic, fundamental property of all living cells, and it is not limited to the neuromuscular system. Instead,
emerging evidence supports a view of bioelectricity as an instructional signaling cue for fundamental cellular physiology, embryonic development, regeneration, and human diseases,
including cancers. Here, we highlight the current understanding of bioelectricity and share
our views on the challenges and perspectives.

[PAGE 1] INTRODUCTION
Bioelectricity refers to the cellular electrical properties intrinsically
caused by the uneven distributions of ions and charged molecules
across cell membranes (Burr and Northrop, 1935). Usually, there
is a high concentration of potassium ions and a low concentration of sodium ions in cytosol compared with the external cellular
environment—the cellular resting membrane potential forms when
these chemical concentrations and their electric charge gradients
reach a balance. The ion channels, pumps, gap junctions, and solute carriers are the major contributors to this uneven distribution
of ions and charged molecules, such as amino acids and proteins,
essential for maintaining cell physiology. The types of these contributors can be variable, given one type of tissues or cells. Thus,
different types of cells may possess a characteristic resting membrane potential, which can be due to a unique profile of ion regulators or to its physiological history, as many of these ion regulators can open and close posttranslationally due to other events
in the cell. From this perspective, the neuron is a specialized cell
type with drastic electric changes. In this brief review, we focus on
nonexcitable cells.
While bioelectricity is a phenomenon that is intrinsically rooted
in individual cells, its influence is not limited to the cellular level
(McCaig et al., 2009). Instead, it can manifest at various levels, including the organ, tissue, and even whole body (Figure. 1). This
multilevel manifestation of bioelectricity plays a crucial role in various physiological processes, such as cell migration, proliferation,
differentiation, and many diseases, including cancer metastasis.
One important function of bioelectric signaling is to enable cellular collectives (tissue networks) to store and process information
in ways that individual cells cannot. Much as neural bioelectricity
in the brain underlies the emergence of a coherent organism that
adaptively navigates three-dimensional space, non-neural bioelectricity allows groups of cells to traverse anatomical morphospace
during embryogenesis and large-scale regeneration. Thus, bioelectricity could have diverse and far-reaching implications in biology.

[PAGE 1] BIOELECTRICITY AND FUNDAMENTAL CELLULAR
PHYSIOLOGY
The differential distributions of ions and charged molecules not
only establish the cell membrane potential but also maintain cell
volume. In animals, stable cell volume is maintained by pumping
Na+ out and K+ in through Na+/K+ ATPase to counter the Donnan
effect, unstable osmotic fluctuations caused by intracellular impermeant molecules from cell metabolism (Kay, 2017). Cellular shapes
and sizes are critical for cell function and cell migration. Migrating
cells are usually polarized and form leading-edge protrusions (e.g.,
lamellipodia, filopodia, and blebs). The local membrane potential
and differential distribution of ion channels were found to contribute to the lamellipodial protrusion (Schwab, 2001). Indeed, the
cell membrane potential also serves as a fundamental regulator of
cell migration through calcium influx (voltage-gated ion channels),
modulating cytoskeleton signaling such as ERK-Rho-kinase, and
modulating cortical actin polymerization (Schwab et al., 2012). Various ion channels (e.g., K+, Na+, Ca2+, Cl-, TRP (Transient receptor
potential) superfamily, and piezo channels) have been reported to
be involved in cell migration (Schwab et al., 2012; Canales Coutino
and Mayor, 2021).
Cellular bioelectric state and its related differential ion concentrations are also critical for cell metabolism. Intracellular ion
concentration may directly affect key metabolic enzymes and essential regulator proteins. In addition, some solute carriers pair
metabolites (e.g., glutamate) transport and specific ions (Zhang
et al., 2019; Alam et al., 2023). Thus, bioelectric change inevitably influences metabolism. Furthermore, cellular membrane
potential can interact with metabolic redox and energy carrier
pairs (NADH/NAD+ and ADP/ATP) through membrane ATPase and
membrane-bound dehydrogenases (Schofield et al., 2020).
Cell proliferation, another critical autonomous behavior, was
also found to be tightly linked with cell membrane potential and
ion channels (Blackiston et al., 2009). Each cell type may have a
distinct bioelectric status. Generally, the cell membrane potentials
of less proliferative cells are more electrically hyperpolarized, and
proliferating cells are more depolarized (Blackiston et al., 2009;
Abdul Kadir et al., 2018). In addition, cell membrane potentials
and potassium ion concentration undergo a rhythmic change during cell cycles (Urrego et al., 2014). For example, MCF-7 mammary
tumor cells were found to be depolarized toward G0/G1, intermediately hyperpolarized during the G₁/S transition, and then further
hyperpolarized during the G2/M stage (Wonderlin et al., 1995). Not
only cell membrane potential but also mitochondrial membrane
potential was reported to regulate cell cycle in yeasts (Gorospe et
al., 2023). In addition, cell membrane potential was also found essential for bacterial cell division (Strahl and Hamoen, 2010), and
bacterial biofilm formation and interbacteria communications can
be mediated by bioelectric signals (Koshland, 1983; Prindle et al.,
2015; Yang et al., 2020). Recently, we have observed that zebrafish
embryonic cells show hyperpolarization before cytokinesis during
cleavage stages (Silic et al., 2022). Alter cell membrane potential
leads to cell proliferation changes, suggesting that bioelectricity
may control the cell cycle, likely through the Ca2+ and K+ ion flux
and cyclin/cyclin-dependent kinases (Whitaker, 1995; Abdul Kadir
et al., 2018; Humeau et al., 2018).
Cell differentiation is generally coupled with cell proliferation and cell metabolism (Agathocleous and Harris, 2013). It is
not surprising that bioelectricity also regulates cell differentiation
(Sundelacruz et al., 2009). Mounting evidence revealed that the cell
membrane potential is not only associated with cell differentiation
but also plays an instructional role in multiple cell types, such as keratinocytes, neural cells, immune cells, and myocytes (Sundelacruz
et al., 2008). For example, hyperpolarization may trigger tyrosine
dephosphorylation of the Kir2.1 channel and cause an increase
of myocyte transcription factors through Ca2+ influx (Konig et al.,
2004). Another fascinating example is that stem cells can be induced to differentiate into osteogenic or neurogenic tissues using
electrical stimulation matching the endogenous membrane potentials (Zhang et al., 2023).

[PAGE 2] BIOELECTRICITY IN EMBRYONIC DEVELOPMENT
Embryonic development is a robust system in which a fertilized egg
proliferates, differentiates, and eventually forms an entire organism. Cell-autonomous behaviors such as proliferation and differentiation are essential. The intercell interactions (short and long
ranges) are also critical for multicellular organisms to pattern and
orient body axes, as well as pattern tissues such as bird feather
systems (Jiang et al., 2021; Tseng et al., 2023) and create organs of
the correct shapes and sizes (Takahashi et al., 2001; Lander, 2011).
Morphogen proteins and transcription factors play crucial roles in
embryogenesis (Wolpert, 1969; Pearson et al., 2005; Briscoe and
Small, 2015; Negrete and Oates, 2021), and some of these are
downstream of bioelectric cues (Vandenberg et al., 2011; Pai et
al., 2015; Dahal et al., 2017; Belus et al., 2018). The role of bioelectricity is becoming evident in the developmental biology of
multiple organisms such as Xenopus, zebrafish, mice, and fruit flies
and has been extensively reviewed (Levin et al., 2017; Harris, 2021;
Levin, 2021a; George and Bates, 2022; Silic and Zhang, 2023). The
ectopic expression of ion channels, as well as dominant negative
or hypermorphic mutations, leads to drastic morphological structure changes in animal models and human patients bearing channelopathies (Masotti et al., 2015; Adams et al., 2016; Sun et al.,
2019). This finding suggests that bioelectricity may serve as organlevel or whole-body-level instructional signals. Bioelectric signals
are critical for embryonic patterning that sets organ shapes and
sizes, as reported in zebrafish fin-size – altered mutants caused
by multiple K+ channels, connexins, and solute carriers (lovine and
Johnson, 2000; lovine et al., 2005; Perathoner et al., 2014; Lanni
et al., 2019; Silic et al., 2020; Daane et al., 2021; Stewart et al.,
2021). In addition, changes in the bioelectric state of certain embryonic regions in a developmental stage can change the identity of that region to different organs. For example, ectopic eyes
were induced via expression of a constitutively conductive EXP1
cation channel, glycine-gated chloride channel, or dominant negative Kir6.1 (Kcnj8) in Xenopus head or trunk regions (Pai et al.,
2012), including gut tissues normally thought to be incompetent to
acquire eye fate in vertebrates. A similar phenotype caused by multiple channels strongly supports the idea that bioelectricity, not individual ion channels, is the key to these embryonic phenotypes—
a conclusion also supported by the ability to swap vertebrate ion
pumps for yeast pumps with no sequence or structural homology
while keeping their functional effects in regeneration (Adams et
al., 2007). Indeed, consistent with early studies using microprobes
on Xenopus embryos, a recent investigation using the GEVI (genetically encoded voltage indicator), ASAP1, revealed characteristic
voltage changes during zebrafish embryogenesis (Silic et al.
2022). Moreover, it was discovered that external electrical currents
could regulate tissue size and shape in vitro (Shim et al., 2024). It
is clear that bioelectricity plays a crucial instructional role in embryonic development. A few hypotheses, such as bioelectric code
and integration with a morphogenic field, have been proposed as
frameworks within which to understand how patterns of bioelectric state map onto anatomical outcomes (Tseng and Levin, 2013b;
Levin and Martyniuk, 2018; Harris, 2021).


[PAGE 3] BIOELECTRICITY IN TISSUE HOMEOSTASIS AND
REGENERATION
Upon completion of embryonic development, tissue, and organlevel bioelectric signaling remains functional and is critical for tissue
homeostasis, which is usually achieved through regeneration and
tissue turnover. Turnover is a universal process of decay and regeneration of new components across biological systems (Reddien,
2024). Electrically coupled cells and collective electrical fields may
serve as regenerative cues for other chemical and mechanical signals responsive to tissue integrity changes or injury (Levin, 2009;
Tyler, 2017; McLaughlin and Levin, 2018). Consistent with this notion, electric currents have been recorded in the newt limb and
Xenopus tadpole tail regeneration (Borgens et al., 1977b; Reid et
al., 2009). Moreover, the regeneration can be modulated by external electric stimulation, V-ATPase, and voltage-gated Na+ channel, Nav1.2, in tadpole tail regeneration (Borgens et al., 1977a;
Adams et al., 2007; Tseng et al., 2010). In addition to newts and
frogs, bioelectricity in regeneration was also reported in murids and
zebrafish (Becker, 1972; Hechavarria et al., 2010; Monteiro et al.,
2014; Leppik et al., 2015). Similarly, electric response and wound
healing have been demonstrated in epithelial cells, and the regenerative bioelectricity has been found to be mediated by PI(3)K and
redox signaling (Zhao et al., 2006; Reid and Zhao, 2014; Ferreira et
al., 2016).
In addition to vertebrates, bioelectricity is evident in planarian regeneration, where it is responsible for the patterning of
the anterior-posterior axis. Targeting the endogenous bioelectric
circuit in regenerating planarian fragments can produce no-head
and two-head animals (Beane et al., 2011; Beane et al., 2013;
Durant et al., 2019). Strikingly, a temporary (as brief as 3 h) alteration of the bioelectric state gave rise to planaria, which have a
permanently altered target morphology—their fragments continue
to generate two heads in perpetuity with no further manipulation
(Oviedo et al., 2010; Durant et al., 2017), motivating a model in
which the bioelectric circuit holds anterior-posterior axis polarity as
a kind of rewritable memory separate from the genetics (Pezzulo et
al., 2021).
Altering the bioelectric state of the blastema by sodium
ionophores was able to induce complete regeneration of tails and
limbs in amphibia in normally nonregenerative conditions, acting
as a brief trigger that kickstarts a complex program of changes in
gene expression in anatomy (Tseng et al., 2010; Tseng and Levin,
2013a). The bioelectric role in regeneration is also being validated
in other organisms. Fruit fly gut epithelial regeneration has also
been reported to be bioelectric dependent on gap junction - mediated Ca2+ currents triggered by neurons (Petsakou et al., 2023).
Another exciting discovery is that Nav1.7 was identified as a critical chondrocyte regulator and therapeutic target for osteoarthritis,
a joint degeneration disease. The Nav1.7 channel regulates the
chondrocyte secretome through Ca2+ signaling, and blocking this
channel can facilitate the progression of osteoarthritis (Fu et al.,
2024). As aging is naturally linked with tissue/organ homeostasis
and regeneration, it is not a surprise that bioelectricity also plays a
crucial role in aging (Silver and Nelson, 2018; Pio-Lopez and Levin,
2024).

[PAGE 3] BIOELECTRICAL MALFUNCTIONS AND CANCER: A
FAILURE OF MULTICELLULARITY
Cancer, though defined on the pathology level, is often thought of
as a disease of genome decay, accompanied by genomic instability and a myriad of mutations from chromosome changes to single
nucleotide mutations. So far, only a small number of genes have
been defined as cancer driver genes (oncogenes or tumor suppressor genes), which are critical for cancer formation (Stratton et
al., 2009). With the completion of many human cancer genomes,
essentially all human genes are found mutated in some human cancer cell genomes (Ding et al., 2018; Martinez-Jimenez et al., 2020;
Ostroverkhova et al., 2023). So, it is unsurprising that many ion
channels were reported in cancers, especially given that more than
400 channels are in the human genome and are widely expressed
in many cell types (Hutchings et al., 2019). Other models of cancer,
favoring nongenetic mechanisms (Soto and Sonnenschein, 2011;
Sonnenschein and Soto, 2016), likewise implicate impairments of
bioelectrical signaling as defects in the mechanisms that normally
bind individual cells to a common purpose in normal tissue and
organ morphostasis (Levin, 2021b).
A role for bioelectric signaling in cancer, via the role of sodium
and potassium channels, is beginning to be dissected, and even
some channel blockers were already in clinical trials (Ding et al.,
2018; Prevarskaya et al., 2018; Martinez-Jimenez et al., 2020; Bell
et al., 2023; Ostroverkhova et al., 2023). The detailed correlation
evidence of ion channels in cancer has already been reviewed
(Montgomery et al., 2020). As bioelectricity is an intrinsic signal
and has a wide distribution of ion channels, it is undoubted that
it has an essential cellular function in tumor initiation, progression,
and metastasis from various human cancers (Yang and Brackenbury,
2013; Robinson et al., 2021; Sheth and Esfandiari, 2022). Glioma, a
notorious brain tumor, is another of the most studied tumors for the
role of bioelectricity. Glioma cells can interact with neurons through
glioma synapses and gap junctions to change neuron bioelectric
activities and cause disease symptoms. Recently, the in vivo glioma
neuron interactions were demonstrated in awake mice using a
genetically encoded Ca2+reporter, GCaMP6f (Montgomery et al.,
2020).
In animal models, bioelectric signals have been shown to induce melanoma in the absence of genetic defects or oncogene
drivers (Morokuma et al., 2008; Lobikin et al., 2015), as well as to
normalize tumors induced by human oncogenes such as TP53 and
KRAS mutations (Chernet and Levin, 2013; Chernet et al., 2016).
Recently, a neuron-like GABA-mediated bioelectrical activity between melanoma cells and keratinocytes was revealed in the zebrafish genetic melanoma model (Tagore et al., 2023). During cancer progression, cancer cells may depolarize cellular membrane
potential to achieve independent cell growth and uncontrolled
proliferation, and this process is tightly linked to ion channel alterations and Ca²+ signals (Yang and Brackenbury, 2013). Depolarized glioma cell membrane potential was able to promote tumor
proliferation, and hyperpolarization reduced the glioma progression (Venkatesh et al., 2019). Similarly, knockdown gap junction
GJB2 could disrupt cancer cell nanotube projection and inhibit tumor invasiveness (Bahcheli et al., 2024). The cancer cell bioelectric
changes may also influence cell differentiations and make some
cancer stem-like cells (Biagiotti et al., 2006; Biella et al., 2007). The
tumor microenvironment (TME) usually consists of an extracellular
matrix and multiple cell types, including fibroblasts, immune cells,
and endothelial cells. During cancer progression, TME profoundly
impacts cancer cell bioelectricity and vice versa, along with interactions between bioelectric, biochemical, and mechanical signals
(see details in next section) (Sheth and Esfandiari, 2022). Consistent
with this notion, neuronal regulation in many types of cancer has
recently been recognized since the bioelectric contributions from
neurons can be relatively measured (Gillespie and Monje, 2020;
Winkler et al., 2023).
Bioelectricity is also crucial for metastasis due to cancer cell bioelectric status and cancer microenvironment. (Payne et al., 2019).
It is well known that ion channel distribution and related cell membrane potential are key regulators for cell migration (Schwab et al.,
2012). Cancer cells may co-opt similar mechanisms for metastasis
(Zhang et al., 2024). Many studies suggested that depolarized cancer cells may tend to be more metastatic (Ribeiro et al., 2020). On
the tissue or organ level, bioelectricity may coordinate the metastasis from invasion to colonization through the TME and blood or
lymphatic vessel environments. Collective migration and electric
field were also frequently reported in cancers (Li et al., 2013; Garg
et al., 2019; Zhu et al., 2020). Thus, ion channel blockers/agonists
and external electric fields may interrupt cancer development. Indeed, ion channels' function and potential as therapeutic targets
are currently being investigated (Takayasu et al., 2020; Abed et
al., 2023). In addition, electrotherapy and external electric devices
have already been clinically applied to glioma based on the principle of bioelectricity (Rominiyi et al., 2021).

[PAGE 4] CHALLENGES, NEW PROGRESS, AND PERSPECTIVES
One of the challenges is that the bioelectricity concept is not well
accepted or even well known in many research areas. A prominent
contributing factor is the misconception that bioelectricity is exclusively relevant in neuroscience, not nonexcitable tissues (Levin,
2021a). But this is gradually changing as more scientific discoveries are revealed and published. The bioelectricity subgroup in the
Cell Bio 2023 is a great advance, at least to the cell biology research community (Pai et al., 2024). The special topic journal, like
Bioelectricity, is an excellent move and a landmark for the bioelectricity field. The second barrier is the largely unrevealed connection
with the current biomedical research regime centered on biochemistry and genetics. Genetics alone does not determine phenotypes
entirely because the bioelectrical layer of control provides a kind of
physiological "software" that provides extra plasticity to the genetically encoded hardware. For example, bioelectric status changes
can induce persistent alternative anatomical structures after regeneration and even ones associated with different species than the
genomic default (Sullivan et al., 2016; Levin, 2021a). Likewise, genetic state and phenotype diverge in animals bearing oncogenic
mutation but no tumor due to bioelectric normalization.
Biochemical molecules are deemed as the mainstream signaling carriers (Lander, 2011). Bioelectricity is different from traditional
biochemical signals in many ways. The bioelectric signals generally serve as overall body patterning instruction and coordinate
and program overall body anatomy (Levin, 2021a). Essentially, the
bioelectric control could be an epigenetic mechanism that guides
morphogenesis usually through a robust and dynamic status (i.e.,
cellular voltage memory) (Levin et al., 2017; Levin and Martyniuk,
2018; Levin, 2021a). Furthermore, there is a lack of a 1:1 relationship between bioelectric outcome and gene products. This is
because bioelectricity is an overall readout of multiple contributors (channels, gap junctions, etc.) and multiple downstream output routes to biochemical machinery on the cellular level (Levin,
2014, 2021a). Bioelectric patterns were found to impact important
morphogen proteins such as BMP, SHH, and FGFs, which are critical for embryonic development, adult tissue, and organ regeneration. For example, BMP signaling was found to be regulated by
KCNJ2-mediated bioelectricity in mice and fruit flies (George and
Bates, 2022). Cell membrane potential stabilizes SMO and regulates hedgehog (HH) signaling in fruit fly wing discs (Emmons-Bell
and Hariharan, 2021; Spannl et al., 2021). The Na+ and K+ gradients are essential for SHH secretion and SMO activation (Petrov et
al., 2020). Likely due to the nature of secondary messenger, calcium signaling is often reported as a common downstream pathway. The calcium signal is similar to cellular voltage change during
zebrafish embryos (Chen et al., 2017; Silic et al., 2022). In addition
to calcineurin and PI(3)K pathways, Ca2+ flux can modulate bioelectricity and tune the conductivity of ion channels that directly
contribute to cell bioelectricity and excitability (Clapham, 2007). It
is hard to distinguish the bioelectricity from the Ca2+ signaling, but
additional transduction mechanisms, such as serotonin movement
(Fukumoto et al., 2005) and K-ras clustering (Zhou et al., 2015),
exist for converting bioelectric information into downstream transcriptional readouts.
In addition to biochemical interactions, bioelectricity is also
tightly linked with mechanical transduction, which is involved in various physiological (e.g., touching, hearing, angiogenesis, development, and regeneration) and pathological processes (e.g., cardiac
hypertrophy, muscular dystrophy, and polycystic kidney) (Martinac,
2014). Some ion channels, such as TRP, PIEZO, K2P, and ENaC
(epithelial sodium channel), can directly sense cellular mechanical
forces and convert mechanical changes into an electric signal or Ca2+ flux (Martinac, 2014; Jin et al., 2020). Inversely, PIEZO
channels were also found to be gated by voltage (Moroni et al.,
2018). The extracellular matrix proteins can also directly influence
ion channel conductivities on the cell membrane. For example,
chondroitin sulfates were reported to modify voltage-dependent
ion channels (Vigetti et al., 2008). Similarly, extracellular matrix proteins can also impact connexin functions (Imbeault et al., 2009).
Thus, these mechanical, bioelectric, and biochemical signals can
interplay and coordinately regulate complex biological processes
such as stem cell differentiation and cancers (Engler et al., 2006;
Discher et al., 2009; Karska et al., 2023).
Another challenge of bioelectricity research is the still limited
available experimental approaches. The overall cellular bioelectric
status is an integration from multiple inputs of ion channels, pumps,
gap junctions, and solute carriers. Thus, the bioelectric status is
robust and dynamic and is usually a component of physiological
feedback, requiring the development of bioelectric simulator platforms (Pietak and Levin, 2016), and more broadly, new conceptual frameworks borrowed from multiscale neuroscience (Pezzulo
and Levin, 2015). Genetic mutation of one of these contributors
is generally insufficient to cause a phenotype unless the mutation is dominant negative or hypermorphic (Silic and Zhang, 2023).
This phenomenon was noticed as bioelectricity does not reduce
to molecular genetics (Levin, 2014). Thus, identifying a critical endogenous contributor is hard since forward genetic screening is
less effective. As bioelectricity is highly dynamic, measuring in vivo
cellular bioelectric status is also challenging using old-fashioned
chemical dyes or patch clamp techniques. Fortunately, newly developed tools such as optical probes, GEVIs, optogenetics, and
chemogenetics can readily be adapted to bioelectricity research
using well-established model organisms such as zebrafish (Foust
et al., 2023; Silic and Zhang, 2023). However, nonoptical reporter
technologies will be needed to detect bioelectric states in deep
tissues. Another exciting area of progress involves electroceuticals
(Balasubramanian et al., 2024), including pharmacological and optogenetic modalities that target tissue native bioelectric networks
instead of a specific pathway (Adams et al., 2013; Chernet et al.,
2016; Pio-Lopez and Levin, 2023).
In addition to challenges, some new frontiers of cell biology related to bioelectricity have emerged. Extracellular vesicle (EV) is
one of them. EVs are cell-derived membrane-enclosed particles
found in essentially all cell types. Currently, EVs are known as a
universal way of intracellular communication as they can deliver
soluble mediators, such as proteins (cytokines, morphogens, and
microRNAs, to the direct contact of neighboring cells. EVs can be
classified into exosomes or ectosomes based on their biogenesis, and they have variable sizes (Zappulli et al., 2016; Salomon et
al., 2022; van de Wakker et al., 2023). The EVs may directly distribute ion channels such as sodium channels, glutamate receptor
subunits, solute transporters, connexin, and aquaporins (Faure et
al., 2006; Soares et al., 2015; Pathare et al., 2017; Barros Lamus
et al., 2021; Nouri et al., 2021). Thus, they may modulate cellular
bioelectricity. On the other hand, bioelectricity could also regulate
EV formation and release. P2X7R, an ATP-gated ion channel, was
found in controlling EV release (Golia et al., 2023). Like EV, the cell
membrane tunneling nanotubes (TNTs) are another type of intercellular communication for diverse contents from ions and proteins
to organelles. However, the TNT working range (physical distance
between cells) is longer than EVs. TNTs have an actin structure and
portions of the plasma membrane between two cells and facilitate
cytoplasm and organelle exchange (Cervantes and Zurzolo, 2021;
Zurzolo, 2021; Wang et al., 2024). TNTs are also related to cellular bioelectricity since connexin and Ca2+ flux were found to be
generated and propagated within TNTs (Smith et al., 2011; Vargas
et al., 2019). Moreover, cells connected by TNT can be electrically
coupled through connexins (Wang et al., 2010). This TNT-mediated
electrical coupling could modulate intracellular downstream signaling molecules such as PI3K (Abounit and Zurzolo, 2012). Thus, both
EVs and TNTs expand the horizon of bioelectricity.

In conclusion, bioelectricity is a universal, multifaceted signaling
modality for regulating autonomous collective cell behavior, embryonic development, regeneration, and diseases such as cancers.
Although there are some challenges, significant progress has been
made in recent years. With newly developed tools, we expect bioelectricity to find its way into cell, developmental, and evolutionary
biology, as well as many other biomedical research areas.

[PAGE 5] ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We thank Ziyu Dong for the illustration of the figure. G.Z. is supported by the National Institute of General Medical Sciences of the
National Institutes of Health (R35GM124913). The content is solely
the responsibility of the authors and does not necessarily represent
the official views of the funding agents. M.L. gratefully acknowledges support via a grant from the John Templeton Foundation,
via a Sponsored Research Agreement from Astonishing Labs, and
via Guy Foundation Family Trust (grant 103733-00001).