Endogenous Gradients of Resting Potential Instructively
Pattern Embryonic Neural Tissue via Notch Signaling and
Regulation of Proliferation

Biophysical forces play important roles throughout embryogenesis, but the roles of spatial differences in cellular resting potentials during large-scale brain morphogenesis remain unknown. Here, we implicate endogenous bioelectricity as an instructive factor during brain patterning in *Xenopus laevis*. Early frog embryos exhibit a characteristic hyperpolarization of cells lining the neural tube; disruption of this spatial gradient of the transmembrane potential (Vmem) diminishes or eliminates the expression of early brain markers and causes anatomical mispatterning of the brain, including absent or malformed regions. This effect is mediated by voltage-gated calcium signaling and gap-junctional communication. In addition to cell-autonomous effects, we show that hyperpolarization of transmembrane potential (Vmem) in ventral cells outside the brain induces upregulation of neural cell proliferation at long range. Misexpression of the constitutively active form of Notch, a suppressor of neural induction, impairs the normal hyperpolarization pattern and neural patterning; forced hyperpolarization by misexpression of specific ion channels rescues brain defects induced by activated Notch signaling. Strikingly, hyperpolarizing posterior or ventral cells induces the production of ectopic neural tissue considerably outside the neural field. The hyperpolarization signal also synergizes with canonical reprogramming factors (POU and HB4), directing undifferentiated cells toward neural fate in vivo. These data identify a new functional role for bioelectric signaling in brain patterning, reveal interactions between Vmem and key biochemical pathways (Notch and Ca²⁺ signaling) as the molecular mechanism by which spatial differences of Vmem regulate organogenesis of the vertebrate brain, and suggest voltage modulation as a tractable strategy for intervention in certain classes of birth defects.

[PAGE 1] Introduction
The embryonic CNS is a paradigm case of complex morphogenesis within which to decode the biophysical forces that enable pattern formation. Understanding the convergence of genetic and physiological signaling toward large-scale anatomy of the brain holds enormous biomedical potential for addressing birth defects and repairing injuries. The tightly orchestrated proliferation and expansion of the neural progenitor population underlie formation of a complex brain from the pseudostratified neuroepithelial tube (Joseph and Hermanson, 2010). Organ size and target morphology are precisely controlled in all life forms from plants to vertebrates (Stanger, 2008). Appropriate organ size is achieved through extensive proliferation, growth, and remodeling during development (Stanger, 2008; Joseph and Hermanson, 2010), but the mechanisms that encode this information and ensure appropriate size and morphology remain largely unknown. Both physical forces/properties (Thompson, 1942; Stanger, 2008), as well as genetic developmental programs (Zhao et al., 2011; Harvey and Hariharan, 2012), are involved. Here, we reveal a new morphogenetic role for transmembrane voltage potential as a regulator of brain morphogenesis and investigate the mechanisms by which Vmem distribution contributes to the development of the vertebrate brain.

The idea that spatiotemporal electrical gradients across tissue direct growth and form was proposed many decades ago (Burr, 1932). This has since been investigated in the context of electric fields' roles in cell migration, regeneration, and wound healing (McCaig et al., 2005; Pullar, 2011). Recently, a new aspect of developmental physiology—spatiotemporal patterns of transmembrane potential (Vmem) of cells across tissues in vivo—was revealed as a key regulator of patterning (Sundelacruz et al., 2009; Vandenberg and Levin, 2010; Beane et al., 2013; Levin, 2013; Tseng and Levin, 2013; Perathoner et al., 2014). Tightly regulated differences in Vmem among key cell groups establish anatomical polarity, positional information, and organ identity during vertebrate appendage regeneration (Monteiro et al., 2014; Perathoner et al., 2014), cancer initiation and metastasis (Brown et al., 1994; Brackenbury, 2012), eye formation (Nuckels et al., 2009; Vandenberg et al., 2011; Pai et al., 2012b), left-right patterning (Levin et al., 2002; Adams et al., 2006), and planarian head induction and patterning (Beane et al., 2013).

It has long been known that electrical spiking activity of neurons regulates neurogenesis (Deisseroth et al., 2004; Spitzer, 2006; Swapna and Borodinsky, 2012). Here, we asked whether the resting electrical properties of neural precursor cells, and importantly their neighbors, might regulate large-scale patterning of the CNS. Could information encoded in steady-state properties (not action potentials) of embryonic cells direct neural induction, differentiation, and gene expression during the formation of a complex brain? Embryos of *Xenopus laevis* are an excellent model for neurodevelopment and its disorders (Pratt and Khakhalin, 2013) and uniquely suited for biophysics experiments. Our data indicate that endogenous transmembrane potential gradients (Vmem) play important roles during neural induction and neural tissue development. These effects of Vmem change are mediated by gap junctions (GJ) and Ca²⁺ flux and regulate key transcription factors within developing neural tissue. Vmem levels also regulate tissue size via long-range control over cell proliferation. Remarkably, reinforcing these powerful endogenous signals can rescue brain morphology defects, while misexpression of ion channels induces ectopic neural tissue well outside the endogenous neural fields. These results suggest a new modality for therapeutic applications in nervous system development and disease.

[PAGE 2] Materials and Methods
Animal husbandry. *Xenopus laevis* embryos were fertilized in vitro according to standard protocols (Sive et al., 2000) in 0.1× Marc's Modified Ringer's (MMR; 10 mM Na⁺, 0.2 mM K⁺, 10.5 mM Cl⁻, and 0.2 mM Ca²⁺, pH 7.8). Intracellular ion concentrations in *Xenopus* embryos are as follows: 21 mM Na⁺, 90 mM K⁺, 60 mM Cl⁻, and 0.5 mM Ca²⁺ (Gillespie, 1983). *Xenopus* embryos were housed at 14–18°C (14°C overnight after injection and subsequently at 18°C) and staged according to Nieuwkoop and Faber (1967). PNTub::GFP transgenic *Xenopus* were created as described previously (Kroll and Amaya, 1996) except that the restriction enzyme was omitted (Marsh-Armstrong et al., 1999; Lin et al., 2012). There is no practical way to precisely determine the sex of the embryos at the stages at which these procedures are done, and the ratio of male:female should be 50:50 in all of our experiments. All experiments were approved by the Tufts University Animal Research Committee (M2011-70) in accordance with the guide for the care and use of laboratory animals.

Microinjections. Capped synthetic mRNAs generated using the mMessage mMachine kit (Ambion) were dissolved in nuclease-free water and injected into embryos immersed in 3% Ficoll using standard methods (Sive et al., 2000). Each injection delivered between 1 and 2 nl or 1–2 ng of mRNA (per blastomere) into the embryos, usually at the four-cell stage into the middle of the cell in the animal pole. Constructs used were as follows: constitutively active notch intracellular domain (Notch ICD; Beck and Slack, 1999), POU (Snir et al., 2006), HB4 (Jullien et al., 2010), Kv1.5 (Strutz-Seebohm et al., 2007), GlyR (Davies et al., 2003), dominant-negative Kir6.1 pore mutant (Aw et al., 2010), Bir10 (Fakler et al., 1996), 666 chimera (Hough et al., 2000), Nav1.5 (Onkal et al., 2008), H7 (Paul et al., 1995), and dominant-negative SERT mutant D98G (Barker et al., 1999; Fukumoto et al., 2005b). Kv1.5-β-galactosidase and Kv1.5-tomato were injected as single mRNAs (bicistronic constructs with a single polyA tail at the end) that produce separate proteins due to a viral peptide sequence (2A) inserted between the two cDNA sequences (de Felipe et al., 2006; Szymczak-Workman et al., 2012).
Kv1.5 is a commonly used hyperpolarizing channel (Bertoli et al., 1994; Strutz-Seebohm et al., 2007; Pai et al., 2012b). GlyR is a particularly versatile reagent because it allows the experimental control of Vmem in either direction, using the GlyR opener drug ivermectin (IVM) (Shan et al., 2001) coupled with modulation of the extracellular chloride levels [Cl⁻]ex (Blackiston et al., 2011). The normally depolarizing effect of GlyR misexpression in standard *Xenopus* medium (0.4 mM) [Cl⁻] becomes a hyperpolarizing effect by incubating embryos in the presence of [Cl⁻]ex higher than intracellular chloride [Cl⁻]in (~60 mM) (Davies et al., 2003; Blackiston et al., 2011; Pai et al., 2012b) as this condition drives the influx of negative ions.

The two fluorescent ubiquitinylation-based cell-cycle indicator mRNA constructs were used as previously documented (Sakaue-Sawano et al., 2008). The two mRNA constructs, mKO2-zCdt1 (red insert for G₁ phase) and mAG-zGeminin (green insert for S/G2/M phase), were used in a 1:2 ratio and injected into both cells at the two-cell stage for an even distribution within the embryo.

Imaging Vmem using CC2-DMPE:DiBAC₄(3). CC2-DMPE and DiBAC4(3) voltage reporter dyes were obtained from Invitrogen and used as per the standard protocol, including dark-field and flat-field correction (Adams and Levin, 2012). Briefly, the use of two dyes with opposite emission profiles simultaneously provides an internal control and allows ratiometric normalization. CC2-DMPE stock (5 mM) was dissolved 1:1000 in 0.1× MMR, and the embryos were incubated in the dark in this solution for at least 1 h followed by washes with 0.1× MMR. DiBAC4(3) stocks (1.9 mM) were dissolved 1:4000 in 0.1× MMR, and the CC2-DMPE-stained embryos were then incubated in the dark in this solution for at least 30 min followed by visualization under the microscope. An Olympus BX-61 microscope equipped with a Hamamatsu ORCA AG CCD camera and controlled by MetaMorph software (Molecular Devices) was used to collect the signal. NIH ImageJ software was used to quantify the fluorescence intensities of the CC2-DMPE:DiBAC signal.

In situ hybridization. *Xenopus* embryos were collected and fixed in MEMFA (Sive et al., 2000), and in situ hybridization was performed as previously described (Harland, 1991; Sive et al., 2000). The embryos were washed with PBS 0.1% Tween 20 (PBST) and transferred through a series of methanol washes 25–50% to 75–100%. In situ antisense probes were generated in vitro from linearized templates using a DIG-labeling mix (Roche). Chromogenic reaction times were optimized for signal-to-background ratio. Probes used were *otx2* (Pannese et al., 1995), *chordin* (Sasai et al., 1994), *cerberus* (Bouwmeester et al., 1996), *bf1*, and *emx* (Eagleson et al., 2001; Eagleson and Theisen, 2008). NIH ImageJ software was used to quantify the in situ signal intensities.

Immunofluorescence and immunohistochemistry. Spatial detection of proliferation was performed by immunofluorescence for histone H3P on sections. Briefly, embryos were fixed overnight in MEMFA at 4°C (Sive et al., 2000), embedded in agarose, and sectioned at 100 µm thickness using a Leica vibratome (VT1000S) as per the standard protocol (Blackiston et al., 2010) or embedded in paraffin and sectioned at 5 µm thickness using a Leica microtome as per the standard protocol (Sive et al., 2000). The sections were permeabilized in PBS 0.1% Triton X-100; antigen retrieved using citrate buffer, pH 6.0 (heating in a microwave); blocked with 10% goat serum in PBST for 1 h at room temperature; and incubated at 4°C overnight with primary antibody (Anti-H3P; Millipore-Invitrogen 04-817) for proliferation at 1:1000 dilution in PBST + 10% goat serum (blocking buffer). Sections were washed six times in PBST and incubated with Alexa Fluor-conjugated fluorescent secondary antibody (Invitrogen) at 1:1000 dilution in PBST 10% goat serum overnight at 4°C. Sections were washed six times in PBST and photographed using an Olympus BX-61 microscope equipped with a Hamamatsu ORCA AG CCD camera and controlled by MetaMorph software.

For ectopic neural tissue detection, immunochemistry was performed on whole embryos. Briefly, embryos were fixed in MEMFA (Sive et al., 2000) and blocked with PBST 5% goat serum incubated in primary antibody for Sox2 (Cell Signaling Technology, CST-2748S) or NCAM (Abcam ab5032) at 1:500 dilution in the blocking solution. Horseradish peroxidase-conjugated secondary antibody (Invitrogen) was used at 1:1000 dilution, and color was developed with the DAB Kit (Vector Laboratories SK-4100).

Drug exposure. *Xenopus* embryos were incubated in pharmacological blockers or channel openers dissolved in 0.1× MMR during the stages of interest as indicated in respective experiments followed by several washes with 0.1× MMR. Embryos were exposed (from stage 10 to 30 unless otherwise specified, because neural/brain tissue development takes place in this time period, allowing specific testing of effects on these processes while allowing cleavage and gastrulation to proceed normally) to the following: 10 µM IVM (Sigma), 5 µM verapamil (Sigma), 200 µM Lindane (Sigma), 10 µM fluoxetine (Tocris Bioscience), 10 µM sertraline (Tocris Bioscience), 0.2 M lithium chloride (LiCl; Sigma; 10 min at 32-cell stage), or UV light (75 s at one-cell stage; UVP Transilluminator Model M-15).

Intracellular recordings from embryo cells. Membrane potentials were measured using an oocyte clamp OC-725C amplifier (Warner Instruments) with a single voltage electrode. Microelectrodes were made from thin-walled borosilicate glass pulled with a flaming/brown micropipette puller (p-97; Sutter Instruments) and back-filled with electrode solution (2 M potassium acetate, 10 mM KCl, and 5 mM HEPES, pH 7.5). Tip resistances were 80–100 MΩ. Electrode penetration of ectodermal cells was by visual guidance on a fixed-stage microscope (Zeiss) using a three-axis micromanipulator.

Statistics. All statistical analyses were performed using Microsoft Excel. Data were either pooled from various iterations, with χ² square analysis performed on them, or data from various iterations were analyzed by *t* test (for two groups) or ANOVA (for more than two groups).

[PAGE 3] Results
Cells lining the neural tube show specific hyperpolarization before neural tube closure in *Xenopus*
A study of endogenous bioelectrical patterns during craniofacial development (Vandenberg et al., 2011) showed a strong hyperpolarization signal from the cells of the neural plate, as the neural folds are formed and close to form the neural tube. To characterize in detail the changes in diverse resting potential (Vmem) states across neural development, we used in vivo time-lapse imaging with the voltage-sensitive dye pair CC2-DMPE:DiBAC (Adams and Levin, 2012). During neurulation, the neural folds remain relatively depolarized while the neural plate cells exhibit hyperpolarization (Fig. 1A, blue arrows; n = 23); this begins as early as the start of neural fold formation (stage 12; data not shown) of *Xenopus* embryos; this signal progressively intensifies until the closure of the neural tube at which point the signal can no longer be seen (Fig. 1B,C; n = 10; Vandenberg et al., 2011). Whole-cell electrophysiological recordings of Vmem from the neural plate cells (approximately −51 mV; stages 16–17) showed them to be hyperpolarized by ~40 mV compared with the neighboring cells (Fig. 1D; n = 5, *p* = 0.0001). The presence of distinct resting potentials across the neural plate, and the dynamic nature of Vmem change at these crucial stages of development, suggested that these gradients may function as regulators of induction and formation of neural tissue.

[PAGE 4] Local perturbation of Vmem causes disruption of endogenous brain development
The experimental alteration of resting potential (in either direction—depolarizing or hyperpolarizing), induced by misexpression of dominant channels, is a strategy often used to identify functional roles for Vmem regulation in embryonic and regenerative patterning (Levin et al., 2002; Adams et al., 2006, 2013; Aw et al., 2008; Vandenberg et al., 2011; Pai et al., 2012b; Perathoner et al., 2014). We specifically altered the Vmem of cells within the relevant regions by injecting mRNAs encoding either Kv1.5 (voltage-gated potassium channel, hyperpolarizing; Strutz-Seebohm et al., 2007) or GlyR (glycine-gated chloride channel α-1, depolarizing; Davies et al., 2003). The effect of each introduced ion channel on the Vmem of cells in the embryo was evaluated at stages 10–21 using the voltage reporter dyes (Fig. 2A; Pai et al., 2012b).

Ion channel mRNA (titrated to the lowest levels that produced brain phenotypes) was injected into the two dorsal cells of the four-cell embryo (the blastomeres from which the neural tissue is derived; Moody, 1987). As in our many previous studies, we saw no sign of general toxicity or ill health (midline patterning, overall growth rate, scale proportions, and behavior were normal; Blackiston et al., 2011; Adams and Levin, 2013). GlyR-injected embryos that were not treated with IVM, the channel opener, showed a similar Vmem pattern to uninjected controls (Fig. 2A). GlyR-injected embryos in the presence of IVM and with normal levels of Cl⁻ in the medium were depolarized due to the efflux of chloride ions (Blackiston et al., 2011, 2015; Pai et al., 2012b). When those embryos were instead kept in 70 mM Cl⁻, the embryos became hyperpolarized (due to the influx of anions; see Materials and Methods for details). Kv1.5 and GlyR + 70 mM Cl⁻ (IVM) both efficiently hyperpolarized 21 of 24 (87.5%) and 11 of 14 (78.6%) embryos, respectively, and GlyR (IVM) efficiently depolarized 18 of 27 (66.7%) embryos (Fig. 2A; Pai et al., 2012b). These treatments eliminated or strongly disrupted the endogenous Vmem pattern in the developing neural tube (Fig. 2A; Pai et al., 2012b).

Are the endogenous patterns of differential hyperpolarization required for normal brain tissue development? To determine this, embryos injected as above (disrupting in both depolarizing and hyperpolarizing directions the normal, spatially heterogeneous distribution of differential Vmem in the anterior of the embryo; Fig. 2A; Brown et al., 1994; Pai et al., 2012b) were allowed to develop to stage 45, and brain morphology was evaluated (Fig. 2B,C). Uninjected embryos, and embryos injected into the ventral blastomeres (which do not contribute to the brain), served as controls (Fig. 2B; data not shown). Coinjection with *lacZ* mRNA (a tracer revealing injected cells) and analysis of the β-gal distribution at stage 35 showed that our targeting of dorsal or ventral tissue was accurate (data not shown). Control tadpoles had intact anterior neural tissue with well-formed nostrils, olfactory bulbs/forebrain, midbrain, and hindbrain (Fig. 2Ci; Pratt and Khakhalin, 2013). In contrast, expression of Kv1.5, GlyR + 70 mM Cl⁻ (IVM), or GlyR (IVM) mRNA caused a high incidence of disrupted endogenous brain tissue formation (33%, 53%, and 65%, respectively; Fig. 2B). The most striking phenotype was the absence of nostrils, olfactory bulbs, and forebrain, with a severely malformed midbrain (Fig. 2Cii). Occasionally, open neural tube defects were also observed. Injection into ventral blastomeres (which do not contribute to the brain) did not cause any brain phenotypes (data not shown). These data suggest that the endogenous pattern of Vmem is required for normal brain development.
To confirm that the observed brain defects were due to disruption of neural tissue and not due to other developmental defects, we used the PNTub::GFP transgenic line (Marsh-Armstrong et al., 1999; Lin et al., 2012) to visualize the neural tube. In control embryos, the neural tube was clearly visible and intact (Fig. 2Di). In contrast, Kv1.5-injected embryos showed a severely disrupted neural tube (Fig. 2Dii). These data confirm that the observed brain defects are due to disruption of neural tissue formation.  Occasionally open neural tube defects were also seen, but these embryos usually did not survive to stage 45. Eye development (which is dependent on proper neural development; Harada et al., 2007; Fuhrmann, 2010; Zuber, 2010) was also affected, resulting in incompletely formed eyes, eyes fused to the brain, and pigmented optic nerves (data not shown) as previously documented (Pai et al., 2012b).

[PAGE 5] Although bioelectric signals have been previously shown to act across considerable distances in vivo (Brown et al., 1994; Blackiston et al., 2011), the observed highly localized hyperpolarization signal in cells of the forming neural tube suggested a local role in brain development. To test the effective range of influence of the hyperpolarization signal, only one side (one dorsal cell at the four-cell stage) of the embryo was then targeted with Kv1.5 mRNA (Fig. 2Ciii,Dii) with the contralateral side as an internal control for brain tissue morphology. In anticipation of subtle changes in brain tissue anatomy, we used a transgenic frog line, PNTub-GFP (Marsh-Armstrong et al., 1999; Lin et al., 2012), where GFP expression is driven by the neural tubulin promoter, resulting in tadpoles whose CNS tissue is GFP labeled (gut is autofluorescent in the same spectrum; Fig. 2D; data not shown). This allowed clear visualization of all *Xenopus* brain structures (nostrils, olfactory bulb/forebrain, midbrain, and hindbrain; Fig. 2Di). Although nostrils and the forebrain/olfactory bulb were the most commonly affected, other subtle brain phenotypes were also observed with dorsal injections using these PNTub-GFP embryos. Phenotypes include bulged midbrain, improper junction between midbrain and forebrain, improperly folded midbrain and forebrain, and fused nostrils (data not shown). Only the injected side showed defects in brain tissue formation (malformed nostrils and reduced olfactory bulb/forebrain lobe), whereas the contralateral uninjected side had normal brain tissue development (Fig. 2Ciii,Dii; possible subtle brain-independent phenotypes on the contralateral uninjected side were not monitored). These results suggest that correct Vmem is a crucial part of normal brain patterning and that this signal does not cross the left-right midline.
We independently used two different ion channels (Kv1.5 and GlyR + IVM + 70 mM Cl⁻) to hyperpolarize because these have no homology at the sequence or structure level, transport totally different ion species, and interact with distinct regulatory molecules. This allowed us to address the functional role of hyperpolarization per se, independently of protein-specific (non-ion-related) functions of either channel, or of chemical (not voltage) properties of either potassium or chloride. The major common factor between these two ion channels is their action (hyperpolarization) on changing Vmem. That both channels cause the same brain tissue phenotype suggests the involvement of Vmem, rather than a channel- or ion-specific role, although additional non-ion-related (protein-specific or chemical) possibilities cannot be completely ruled out.

Our second hypothesis was that both homogenous upregulation and downregulation of Vmem throughout the tissue would cause brain-patterning defects because the spatial pattern of differential voltage states is important. Indeed, both hyperpolarization (Kv1.5) and depolarization (GlyR + IVM) caused brain malformations. Therefore, we suggest that in brain tissue patterning, as is the case for many developmental signals (bioelectricity and chemical factors like Retinoic Acid, Notch, Sonic hedgehog, Wnt, etc.), it is the correct range and distribution that is key; too much or too little of a tightly regulated instructive signal in key locations both cause phenotypes (Artavanis-Tsakonas et al., 1995; Dolmetsch et al., 1998; Pai et al., 2012b; Hori et al., 2013; Levin, 2013; Tseng and Levin, 2013). These results suggest that the Vmem states within the folding neural plate likely serve as an important endogenous component of normal brain development.

[PAGE 6] Perturbation of neural Vmem signal disrupts endogenous brain development markers
Where do Vmem levels function within the hierarchy of known transcriptional regulators of midbrain and forebrain patterning? To assess this, we analyzed the expression of the key transcription factors *otx2* (forebrain and midbrain), *emx* (telencephalon and forebrain), and *bf1* (forebrain precursors) in hyperpolarized embryos (Acampora et al., 1995; Li and Joyner, 2001; Muzio and Mallamaci, 2003; Mukhopadhyay et al., 2011). The expression of *otx2* and *emx* marks the anterior neural plate, and these genes are critically involved in the patterning of the midbrain (Acampora et al., 1995; Li and Joyner, 2001; Muzio and Mallamaci, 2003; Wendler et al., 2013), while *bf1* is an important regulator of forebrain patterning (Bourguignon et al., 1998; Mukhopadhyay et al., 2011). Embryos were injected into one dorsal cell at the four-cell stage with Kv1.5 or GlyR + 70 mM Cl⁻ (IVM; both hyperpolarizing conditions) and analyzed at two different stages: 21/22 and 30. The contralateral uninjected side of the same embryo and uninjected embryos were used as controls. Expression of *otx2*, *bf1*, and *emx* was revealed by in situ hybridization (Fig. 3A). While the differences are apparent qualitatively, the in situ hybridization signal was also quantified as the ratio of control versus injected contralateral sides (Fig. 3A). Injected embryos showed significantly reduced (in both overall area and intensity) expression of *otx2*, *emx*, and *bf1* (Fig. 3A) in the neural field at both stages 21/22 (N = 9 of 13, 7 of 10, and 6 of 9, respectively) and stage 30 [N = 10 of 14 (*emx*) and 6 of 9 (*bf1*)]. The contralateral uninjected side of embryos had normal endogenous levels and patterns of expression compared with uninjected control embryos at both stages 21/22 and 30 (Fig. 3A). These results suggest that the Vmem signal in the neural plate can function upstream (regulates expression) of *otx2*, *emx*, and *bf1* during brain development, although this influence may not be direct and could involve additional intermediate genes.

[PAGE 7] We next asked whether the effects of Vmem on brain patterning were directly linked to later, brain-specific processes, or a consequence of Vmem effects on the earlier phases of embryonic patterning and thus neural induction. To assess this, we performed in situ hybridization with antisense mRNA for the canonical dorsal markers *cerberus* and *chordin* (Fig. 3B). Positive controls illustrating classical changes of neural induction were produced by treating embryos with either the dorsalizing agent LiCl or the ventralizing agent UV light. Untreated embryos were used as negative controls. Experimental embryos were injected with hyperpolarizing channel Kv1.5 mRNA into the two dorsal cells at the four-cell stage and raised until stage 30 (Fig. 3Bi-iv). LiCl-treated embryos were severely dorsalized, with increased expression of *chordin* (N = 9 of 10) and *cerberus* (N = 9 of 9; Fig. 3Bii,vi,x), and a majority formed only dorsal tissue (head, spine, and mouth; Fig. 3Bii). UV-treated embryos were severely ventralized with significantly reduced expression of *chordin* (N = 14 of 15) and *cerberus* (N = 11 of 11; Fig. 3Biii,vii,xi), and a majority formed only ventral tissue (gut; Fig. 3Biii). In contrast, Kv1.5-injected embryos showed control levels and a pattern of *chordin* (N = 20 of 20) and *cerberus* (N = 18 of 18) expression (Fig. 3Bviii,xii) and developed normal ventral and dorsal tissues similar to control embryos (Fig. 3Biv). These results do not support effects of Vmem change on the initial phase of large-scale embryonic dorsoventral axis patterning before neural induction and suggest that the observed voltage regulation of *otx2*, *emx*, and *bf1* is a later event associated with brain patterning.

[PAGE 8] Vmem effects on brain development are transduced by Ca²⁺ channels and GJs
How are changes in Vmem transduced into downstream transcriptional and cellular behavior changes during brain development? To assess this, we performed a suppression test, targeting candidate mechanisms that have been previously shown to convert Vmem changes into transcriptional responses in other contexts (Levin and Stevenson, 2012; Adams and Levin, 2013; Levin, 2014; Pai and Levin, 2014). As before, injection of hyperpolarizing Kv1.5 mRNA into the two dorsal cells of four-cell embryos was used to disturb the later endogenous neural induction Vmem pattern (Fig. 2). Then, each of several targets known to be able to connect Vmem changes to downstream signaling steps (Adams and Levin, 2013) was blocked, one at a time, to determine which one would suppress the Kv1.5 (hyperpolarization)-mediated brain defects (Fig. 4A). Our loss-of-function screen tested pathways for the ability to suppress defects induced by external (experimental) voltage change; all of the reagents were titered to levels that did not, on their own, disrupt endogenous brain patterning in control embryos, to avoid any confounds arising from toxic or teratological effects. Pharmacological blockade was performed during stages 10–30: these are the key stages for brain development, and thus this is the time period during which the Vmem-dependent events must be targeted to attempt to rescue brain development.

Blocking serotonergic signaling via inhibition of the serotonin transporter by chemical blockers (fluoxetine and sertraline; Fukumoto et al., 2005b; Blackiston et al., 2011) or by expression of a dominant-negative SERT mutant protein (Barker et al., 1999; Fukumoto et al., 2005b) did not suppress the effect of Kv1.5-mediated hyperpolarization on brain development (Fig. 4B), though all of these reagents have been shown to efficiently perturb serotonin signaling in *Xenopus* (Barker et al., 1999; Quick, 2003; Fukumoto et al., 2005b; Blackiston et al., 2011; Linder et al., 2014). In contrast, blocking VGCCs (using verapamil), or blocking GJs (using Lindane, a chemical blocker, or mRNA encoding H7, a chimeric dominant-negative connexin construct that inhibits GJ; Paul et al., 1995; Levin and Mercola, 1998) almost completely suppressed the effect of Kv1.5-mediated hyperpolarization on brain development (Fig. 4B; three experimental repeats, one-way ANOVA, *p* < 0.001 with post hoc test). These results suggest that hyperpolarization is likely transduced into downstream cascades via mechanisms involving Ca²⁺ flux and GJ-mediated signaling. These data are consistent with the increased understanding of Ca²⁺ as a central player in the induction of neural fate (Moreau and Leclerc, 2004; Leclerc et al., 2006; Aruga and Mikoshiba, 2011), but do not exclude the involvement of additional transduction mechanisms.

[PAGE 9] Reinforcing brain-appropriate Vmem state rescues active Notch-induced brain defects
We next asked whether reinforcing the brain-appropriate Vmem state could be used to repair brain defects induced by disruption of biochemical pathways known to be involved in brain patterning. Notch signaling is a well-characterized pathway involved in brain patterning (Campos-Ortega, 1995; Artavanis-Tsakonas et al., 1999; Louvi and Artavanis-Tsakonas, 2006; Imayoshi and Kageyama, 2014). To test the interaction between Vmem and Notch signaling, we used mRNA encoding the constitutively active Notch intracellular domain (Notch ICD; Beck and Slack, 1999),

[PAGE 1/2] titrated to a dose that causes brain deformities without disrupting other tissues and organs. The embryos were injected into the two dorsal cells at the four-cell stage and were either left untreated or coinjected with either hyperpolarizing channel mRNAs (Kv1.5 or Bir10) or depolarizing channel mRNA (dominant-negative Kir6.1—DNKir6.1p). The tadpoles were scored for their brain patterning and morphology at stage 45.
Notch ICD mRNA injections caused a significantly elevated incidence of malformed brains (~46%; Fig. 5A) compared with uninjected controls. Severe anterior brain morphology defects, including loss of nostrils (data not shown), near-complete loss of forebrain/olfactory bulbs, and malformed midbrain and eyes, were observed (Fig. 5Bi,ii). To determine whether Notch ICD expression causes any effect on the endogenous Vmem pattern, Notch ICD-injected embryos were analyzed at stage 16 using the CC2-DMPE:DiBAC voltage reporter