[PAGE 1] Article
Cell Reports
Brief Local Application of Progesterone via a
Wearable Bioreactor Induces Long-Term
Regenerative Response in Adult Xenopus Hindlimb

Highlights
• Adult Xenopus laevis frogs are capable of induced increased regenerative response
• Improved limb regeneration is driven by a wearable bioreactor containing progesterone
• Improvements occur at molecular, anatomical, and behavioral (functional) levels
• A 24-hr treatment is sufficient to trigger many months of regenerative growth

Authors
Celia Herrera-Rincon, Annie S. Golding, Kristine M. Moran, Hayley Carabello, David L. Kaplan, Michael Levin

Correspondence
michael.levin@tufts.edu

In Brief
The complexity of vertebrate limbs drives the search for regenerative treatments that trigger endogenous processes of repair. Herrera-Rincon et al. show that a wearable bioreactor containing progesterone, applied for only 24 hr, induces months of regenerative growth and patterning of amputated hindlimbs in the frog Xenopus laevis.


[PAGE 2] Article
Brief Local Application of Progesterone via a Wearable Bioreactor Induces Long-Term Regenerative Response in Adult Xenopus Hindlimb

SUMMARY
The induction of limb repair in adult vertebrates is a pressing, unsolved problem. Here, we characterize the effects of an integrated device that delivers drugs to severed hindlimbs of adult Xenopus laevis, which normally regenerate cartilaginous spikes after amputation. A wearable bioreactor containing a silk protein-based hydrogel that delivered progesterone to the wound site immediately after hindlimb amputation for only 24 hr induced the regeneration of paddle-like structures in adult frogs. Molecular markers, morphometric analysis, X-ray imaging, immunofluorescence, and behavioral assays were used to characterize the differences between the paddle-like structures of successful regenerates and hypomorphic spikes that grew in untreated animals. Our experiments establish a model for testing therapeutic cocktails in vertebrate hindlimb regeneration, identify pro-regenerative activities of progesterone-containing bioreactors, and provide proof of principle of brief use of integrated device-based delivery of small-molecule drugs as a viable strategy to induce and maintain a long-term regenerative response.

INTRODUCTION
The repair of damaged limbs and organs in humans is of paramount importance, as ~2 million Americans are living with limb amputations (Ziegler-Graham et al., 2008). An ideal solution would trigger the native limb-building pathways in vivo, to restore a functional limb from the patient's own cells. Despite concerted efforts on the mechanisms of regeneration (Kawakami et al., 2006; Leppik et al., 2015), there are few reports of rebuilding and/or repairing damaged or lost limbs in non-regenerative animals, and there is a pressing need for a tractable vertebrate model in which to test potential interventions.
Many animals possess a remarkable capacity for appendage regeneration, which is not found in humans despite a high degree of gene homology (Brockes and Kumar, 2008). Xenopus laevis exhibits a regeneration response similar to that of urodele axolotls, which can reform a functional limb after amputation. However, this capability declines markedly throughout development, and in later tadpole and post-metamorphic animals, the resultant regenerate is a hypomorphic cartilage "spike" (Dent, 1962). We have previously shown the induction of tail regeneration in non-regenerative Xenopus stages by targeting the bioelectric state with small-molecule drugs (Adams et al., 2007, 2013; Tseng et al., 2010); however, those studies involved juvenile frogs and used whole-animal exposure to inductive cocktails, a strategy that is limiting because of the extensive use of bioelectric signaling throughout the body. We thus sought to develop a methodology to test targeted delivery of small-molecule electroceuticals in adult animals to overcome their lack of regenerative response with an early, local, and brief intervention.
We recently showed that a wearable bioreactor (Hechavarria et al., 2010) positively affects regenerative capabilities (Golding et al., 2016). Progesterone (Prog) is a potent neurosteroid that showed promise for peripheral nerve regeneration (promoting nerve repair) (Koenig et al., 2000) and bridging in severed rabbit facial nerves (Chávez-Delgado et al., 2003), canine sciatic nerves (Rosales-Cortes et al., 2003), and non-neural tissue remodeling by modulating the inflammatory response to drive wound healing, angiogenesis (McEwen, 1991; Routley and Ashcroft, 2009), and bone remodeling (Hennighausen and Robinson, 2001). In addition, Prog can regulate bioelectric cell state via changes in ion flux (Luoma et al., 2012; Patrat et al., 2002), and bioelectric signaling has been proved to drive regeneration and patterning in multiple assays in Xenopus and other model systems (Herrera-Rincon and Levin, 2016; Levin, 2011, 2014; Lobikin et al., 2015; McLaughlin and Levin, 2018; Tseng and Levin, 2013; Tseng et al., 2007, 2010). Due to its potent and broad actions on neural and non-neural tissue remodeling, as well as its ability to influence bioelectric signaling, we asked whether treatment with a Prog-containing silk device immediately after amputation would improve cellular dynamics and regenerative potential after hindlimb amputation in adult Xenopus.
We report a comprehensive multifactor analysis of the regenerative effects of a compound treatment: cocktail + delivery methodology on adult hindlimb regeneration in Xenopus. We show that a brief exposure—only 24 hr—to this intervention modifies transcriptional networks within the blastema and induces sustained changes in the regenerative capacity over time. Our data establish a platform to test "master regulator" therapeutics, in which a very brief treatment "kick-starts" a long program of growth and remodeling. These findings reveal that the adult Xenopus limb is capable of considerable growth and morphogenesis and illustrates a road map for interventions that can be used to probe and improve the mechanisms of complex appendage regeneration in vertebrate models.

[PAGE 4] RESULTS
Prog Receptor Is Present in Xenopus Adult Limbs, and Prog Levels at the Amputation Site Are Significantly Increased after 24 hr of Prog-Containing Bioreactor Treatment
Hindlimb-amputated animals were either treated with silk-hydrogel devices loaded with Prog (Prog-device group) or an untreated control group (control or Ctrl; Figure 1A). Additional amputated animals treated with a silk-hydrogel device but no drug (Sham group) were also evaluated 24 hr after device attachment. We first sought to confirm that the receptor was present in adult Xenopus limb tissue. The X. laevis classical Prog receptor (xPR-1) participates in the rapid events that mediate oocyte maturation (Bayaa et al., 2000; Martinez et al., 2006; Tian et al., 2000). A fluorescent ligand for PR (Prog 3-[O-carboxymethyl]oxime:BSA-fluorescein isothiocyanate conjugate [PFITC]) and hormone displacement assays revealed PR expression in intact limbs of adult Xenopus. On cross-sections, we detected a high density of labeled cells on the lamellar bone of the limb, especially in the bone marrow (Figure 1B). Other low-positive areas for PR included parts of the epithelial tissue, the connective tissue under the epithelium, and a reduced number of muscle cells. Co-staining with DAPI showed that most of the binding sites were in the nuclei of the bone marrow mesenchymal cells (Figure 1C). Co-incubation with a saturating concentration of Prog (Figure 1D) demonstrated that the hormone displaced the fluorescent ligand from binding to the PR; no labeled cells were detected on parallel sections. Conversely, co-incubation with PFITC in the presence of the non-specific hormone hydrocortisone (physiological ligand of glucocorticoid receptor; Figure 1E) led to a pattern of positive cells that was similar to what was observed after incubation with PFITC in the absence of hydrocortisone. We conclude that the Prog receptor is present in the limbs of adult frogs.

Next, we evaluated the local release (versus a systemic wider effect) of the drug contained in the bioreactor. We used ELISA for Prog quantification on two remote tissues (brain and blood) and on the amputation site (proximal blastema) after 24 hr of device exposure, in animals belonging to the Ctrl, Sham, and Prog-device groups. The analysis of blood and brain showed no significant differences in Prog levels among Ctrl, Sham, and Prog-device treated amputated animals (one-way ANOVA for blood: F = 2.52, p = 0.16; for brain: F = 0.89, p = 0.46; Figures S1A and S1B). Conversely, levels of Prog at the blastema were significantly different among three experimental groups 24 hr after device exposure (one-way ANOVA, F = 182.9, p < 0.01; Figure S1C). While Ctrl and Sham expressed similar Prog levels in the blastema, without significant differences, the hormone levels were clearly higher for Prog-device animals, resulting in significant differences with respect to both Ctrl (p < 0.01 after Bonferroni's post hoc test) and Sham (p < 0.01 after Bonferroni's post hoc test) groups. These results demonstrate that the levels of Prog are significantly increased at the injury site (where the composite bioreactor is applied) only for the animals treated with 24 hr of composite drug device. We conclude that the increased presence of Prog is not itself an outcome of injury and that our device delivers Prog effectively to the local area, but does not disperse it widely throughout the animal.

[PAGE 5] Prog-Containing Bioreactor Modifies Cell Response and Tissue Remodeling during Early Phases of Regeneration
To characterize the effects of Prog-loaded bioreactor on early stages of regeneration, we surveyed the growing fibroblastema region above the amputation plane with a panel of cellular markers (Figures 1F-1Q and S1D-S11). Early in the regenerative process, at 0.5 months post-amputation (mpa), coinciding with the wound epidermis and early blastema stage in the adult regenerative salamander (Young et al., 1985), hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) staining of untreated Ctrl animals revealed the early formation of a cartilage callus around the bone, covered by a thin wound epithelium. Conversely, examination of treated animals showed that groups of irregularly oriented cells frequently occupied part of the subepithelial area, rather than the typical fibrous scar detected in the untreated group (Figures 1F-1H). Proliferation was not significantly increased at this stage after Prog-device treatment, as detected by phosphorylated histone H3 (H3P) immunostaining (Figures S1D-S1F). However, we observed a clear difference in the distribution of the immune cells throughout the anteroposterior axis of the regenerate (from amputation plane to wound epithelium). Close to the amputation plane (or proximal region, first quarter), the number of XL2+ cells was significantly higher in the treated group (with an average of 239 ± 54 leukocytes for Ctrl versus 367 ± 22 cells for the Prog-device group; t test p < 0.05). Conversely, the number of XL2+ cells in the blastema core (or distal from the amputation plane, third posterior quarters) was clearly lower in the treated animals (with an average of 846 ± 319 leukocytes for Ctrl versus 404 ± 101 cells for the Prog-device group; Mann-Whitney test p < 0.05; Figures 1I-1K).

Next, we assessed the cellular populations and responses in each condition at the bud-outgrowth stage (2.5-3 mpa). The proliferation index was calculated as the percentage of H3P+ cells relative to the total number of cells (H3P+ cells/DAPI+ cells * 100). The normalized percentage of proliferative cells expressing H3P in Prog-device animals was not significantly different from the untreated Ctrl group (0.4% ± 0.2% versus 0.3% ± 0.3%, t test p = 0.65; Figures 1L-1N). Then, considering the key role of the vascular system in supplying the actively growing regions of the bud (Tschumi, 1957), we examined the organization of blood vessels in regenerating structures. Lacking suitable antibodies against Xenopus endothelial cells, we stained for smooth muscle cells (which line the arteries) as a means of detecting vascularization (Di Rosa et al., 1995). α-Smooth muscle actin (SMA; Figures S1G-S1I) staining revealed that although non-statistically significant, there appeared to be considerably more major blood vessels in the appendages of treated animals following the longitudinal axis, while the vascularization pattern in the Ctrl group was predominantly formed by minor arteries (the mean area of SMA+ vessels in the Prog-device group was 91.2 ± 48.2 compared to 45.3 ± 160.8 in Ctrl, t test p = 0.1). Because successful limb regeneration in Amphibia is intimately linked to an adequate innervation of the regenerating tissues (Tanaka and Reddien, 2011), we next evaluated the degree and localization of innervation in the regenerate growth by means of anti-acetylated α-tubulin (Tub) immunofluorescence (Figures 1O-1Q). Nerve patterning in the Ctrl group was characterized by irregular single nerve fibers. An extensive and organized innervation was detected after Prog-device treatment, with the presence of specialized groups or large-diameter bundles of nerve fibers (mean area of Tub+ units or fibers was 6.8 ± 4.6 in Prog-device animals versus 2.6 ± 1.2 in Ctrl, Mann-Whitney test p < 0.05).
Our results suggest that the Prog-device intervention decreases immune infiltration toward the apical region of the blastema area and induces a scar-free wound healing with the robust presence of regenerating nerves, which are key markers of specialized tissue organization.

[PAGE 5] Prog-Containing Bioreactor Alters Anatomical Outcome and Bone Remodeling during the Different Regeneration Stages
To determine whether the effects of the combined treatment of the hydrogel device plus Prog led to differences in anatomical outcome, animals were allowed to regenerate during a 9.5-month period (similar to the time required for post-metamorphic adult land-phase Ambystoma to regenerate completely [Young et al., 1985], but shorter than the time needed to develop a full-length limb in Xenopus, which can take ~2 years).
We analyzed different macroscopic parameters for soft-tissue growth and bone patterning (Figures 2A-2E, S2, S3, and S4; Table S1) at representative stages of the whole regenerative process: 0.5 and 1 mpa (early stages: wound healing and blastema formation), 2.5 and 5 mpa (middle stages: bud outgrowth and shape formation), and 7.5 and 9.5 mpa (late stages and complete regenerate stage).
Macroscopic differences between untreated Ctrl (Figure 2A, top) and Prog-device treated (Figure 2A, bottom) animals were detected from the onset of regeneration. Wound and epidermis closure occurred during the first 2 weeks for Ctrl animals. Wound healing in Prog-device animals was delayed, being completed after 1 mpa. At 2.5 mpa, corresponding to the proliferative phase and bud outgrowth, noticeable differences were present between groups. While Ctrl regenerates displayed a typical thin-rod shape (Figure 2A, insert in top right panel), Prog-device treated regenerates with their increased outgrowth became more symmetrically cone-shaped (Figure 2A, insert in bottom right panel). As they progress through regeneration and as previously shown (Dent, 1962), untreated animals formed hypomorphic regenerates, consisting of an invariable single and long cartilaginous spike-like structure. In sharp contrast, a common morphological event for Prog-device animals was the progressive flattening (along the dorsoventral axis) of the pyramidal outgrowth, forming paddle-like structures. At 7.5 mpa, the regenerates in treated animals reached a plateau in growth, with no further changes in length or shape detected at 9.5 mpa.
X-ray images revealed that bone remodeling was also drastically different between groups (Figures 2C-2E). While untreated animals showed a modest level of bone growth beyond the amputation plane (Figure 2C, top), treated animals displayed a robust bone outgrowth (Figure 2C, bottom). Quantification of the area occupied by new bone growth (BAREA; Figure S3A) revealed significant differences between groups at 2.5 mpa (t test p < 0.01) and 5 mpa (Mann-Whitney test p < 0.01). At 7.5 mpa, the bone growth in treated animals reached a plateau, with no further changes detected at 9.5 mpa. At this stage, the skeletal patterning was characterized by two distinct regions: proximal, or nearest the amputation site and extending approximately one-third the length of the regenerate, a swelling of weakly ossified bone, and distal, with non-ossified bone or regenerated cartilage traveling toward the most posterior end. The close correspondence between external morphology and X-ray images revealed that the area of bone swelling was coincident with the pigmented portion of the epidermal layer, and the section occupied by immature bone remained under unpigmented epithelium.

[PAGE 5] Prog-Containing Bioreactor Induces the Formation of Complex, Patterned Structures
Considering the timing for regeneration in adult salamanders and the clear plateau reached after 7.5 mpa, we set the end of the test period at 9.5 mpa. At this stage, untreated Ctrl regenerates displayed cartilaginous spikes, as expected, with a modest level of bone beyond the amputation plane (Figure 3A). In contrast, complex, patterned structures were observed in the treated animals, including broad paddle-like regenerates (Figure 3B), spur-like deviations (Figure 3C), and thick regenerate spikes (Figure 3D). The unpigmented appearance of the epithelium in treated animals was still present, allowing direct visualization of the vascularization pattern, expanding toward the most distal edge of the regenerates. Their unique anatomical outcome was accompanied by a robust bone outgrowth (Figures 3B-3D, X-ray images at right). The skeletal patterning was characterized by two distinct regions: proximal, or nearest the amputation site and extending approximately one-third the length of the regenerate, a swelling of weakly ossified bone, and distal, with non-ossified bone or regenerated cartilage traveling toward the most posterior end. The close correspondence between external morphology and X-ray images revealed that the area of bone swelling was coincident with the pigmented portion of the epidermal layer, and the section occupied by immature bone remained under unpigmented epithelium.

To characterize and quantitatively compare the regenerate shapes between groups, we used morphometric analysis (Figure S2B). Compilation of the resultant "average shape" (Figure 3E) for each group clearly showed that untreated animals developed shapes with drastic narrowing as the structure grew, forming a typical curvature at the tip. Conversely, the Prog-device treated group developed, on average, broader regenerates with less curvature at the end. Quantification and statistical analysis of these shape states showed significant differences in the Mahalanobis distance (p < 0.05) for the profile of the shape of the regenerate.

To facilitate a wholistic analysis of the complex, multifaceted response among the cohorts, we next integrated all of the observed and quantifiable differences between untreated Ctrl and Prog-device treated animals into a composite regenerative index (RI; ranging from 0, a typical hypomorphic spike, to 10, a patterned paddle-like regenerate; see STAR Methods and Tables S3 and S4). We calculated the RI of both experimental groups at two different time points, based on our previous findings of strong differences emerging at 2.5 and 9.5 mpa (Figure 3F; Tables S2 and S3). Our findings clearly revealed a significant difference between untreated and treated groups (two-way ANOVA, p < 0.01 for "group" factor). At 2.5 mpa, the mean RI for the Ctrl group was 1.4 ± 0.4 versus 6.9 ± 1.1 for the Prog-device animals. At 9.5 mpa, Ctrl animals displayed a mean RI of 1.0 ± 0.6, while Prog-device animals showed an average RI of 6.7 ± 1.1. The application of the RI confirmed a bimodal response to the treatment in the Prog-device treated group. The responder individuals reached the highest index scores (PD7 and PD5 in Figures 3B and 3D, respectively, with RI = 10), while non-responders (PD1 in Figure 3D) had low RI scores.

Having observed that regenerates stop growing after ~5-7.5 mpa (Figure 1B, top), we asked whether the endpoint corresponded to any specific anatomical level (position), as gauged by the contralateral (uncut) limb. Quantification of the regenerated limb length (from the knee to the tip of the regenerate) relative to the contralateral uncut limb revealed that the regenerating hindlimb stops growing at a point at which, under normal growth conditions, the animal's digits would appear (Figures 3G and 3H; when it reaches the length of tibiofibula + tarsus).
Our findings demonstrate that the shape of the regenerate long after amputation can be drastically improved and that long-term repatterning can be induced by an intervention applied for 24 hr at the amputation site.

[PAGE 6] Repatterning Induced by 24-hr Prog-Device Treatment Is Accompanied by Cellular and Tissue Changes in the Most Distal Part of the 9.5-mpa Regenerates
To further characterize the long-term effects of the Prog-containing bioreactor, we asked whether cellular and tissue differences were present along with the differences in external morphology. The most distal part of the regenerates (tip) was immunostained to detect innervation (Tub) and vascularization (SMA) pattern (Figures 4A-4F and S5A). Overall, untreated spikes displayed a less differentiated surface for nerves and vessels, being limited to the peripheral edges (Figures 4A and 4C, magenta arrows). Treated regenerates showed a larger specialized surface (Figures 4B and 4D, turquoise arrows), projected toward the internal part of the tissue or cartilage core. Similar to organization detected at the early blastema stages (Figures 1O-1Q), both nerves and vessels showed a higher number and degree of organization after treatment, forming nerve compact units such as bundles and elongated vessels. Control animals expressed an average of 44 ± 19 Tub+ fibers per square millimeter, with a mean fiber area of 351 ± 168 µm². Prog-device animals had an average of 95 ± 41 Tub+ fibers per square millimeter (t test p < 0.01, with respect to Ctrl), with a mean bundle size of 972 ± 515 µm² (Mann-Whitney test p < 0.01). Quantification for SMA immunostaining revealed that while Ctrl animals expressed SMA in 10 ± 4 cells per square millimeter (with an average area of 451 ± 206 µm²), Prog-device treatment increased significantly both the number (31 ± 15 SMA+ cells per square millimeter; Mann-Whitney test p < 0.01) and the grouping of nerve fibers (mean area of SMA+ vessels of 695 ± 327 µm²; t test p < 0.01).

Next, we compared the neurovascular patterning of the tips to the patterns present in uncut or intact limbs. Morphological comparison to cross-sections of uncut limbs (belonging to two different regions: proximal or distal with respect to the plane for the amputation; Figure S5B) revealed that both innervation and vascularization patterns of Prog-device treated regenerates are closer to those in the uncut limb (Figures 4G-4N; Table S4). Individual and disorganized nerve fibers defined the typical Ctrl innervation pattern (Figure 4G, magenta arrows), while Tub⁺ axons in Prog-device treated animals showed a clear tendency toward organization and bundle formation (Figure 4H, turquoise dashed-line circles), similar to the innervation detected in uncut limbs (Figures 4I and 4J, turquoise dashed-line circles). Additional comparisons between Prog-device treated tips and the two different levels of an uncut limb revealed that innervation of Prog-device tips was more similar to the one in the distal region of the hindlimb. Likewise, both the number and morphology and area of the SMA+ vessels for Prog-device tips were clearly closer to the intact limb (Figures 4L-4N, turquoise arrow and asterisks) than to the Ctrl untreated limbs (small vessels indicated by magenta arrows in Figure 4K). Our results show that the Prog-containing bioreactor initiates a long-lasting positive impact on regeneration, detectable more than 9 months later, leading to structures that are morphologically similar to an intact or uncut limb.

[PAGE 7] Combined Treatment with Prog and Bioreactor Induces Molecular Changes Consistent with Digit Formation
To further characterize the molecular changes induced by the combined treatment, we analyzed the expression of several genes related to digit formation in the most distal part of the regenerates (Figures 5A-5D). We first analyzed the expression of Shh, a key regulator of digit identity and patterning (Harfe et al., 2004). Shh expression was detected in the most distal part of the regenerates in both experimental groups (Figures 5A and 5B, magenta arrows). However, the expression pattern was clearly different between groups. While Shh expression in untreated animals was restricted to a small group of cells, forming a single spot, treated regenerates displayed a broader expression pattern, forming several spots along the distal edge of the regenerate (Figures 5A and 5B, turquoise arrows).
Next, we analyzed the expression of Hoxd13, a gene involved in autopod (hand/foot) formation and digit patterning (Zakany and Duboule, 2007). Hoxd13 expression was detected in the most distal part of the regenerates in both experimental groups (Figures 5C and 5D, magenta arrows). However, the expression pattern was clearly different between groups. While Hoxd13 expression in untreated animals was restricted to a small group of cells, forming a single spot, treated regenerates displayed a broader expression pattern, forming several spots along the distal edge of the regenerate (Figures 5C and 5D, turquoise arrows).


[PAGE 8] These results suggest that the combined treatment with the bioreactor plus Prog induces molecular changes in the most distal part of the regenerate that are consistent with digit formation.

[PAGE 10] Figure 3. Instead of the Typical Spikes Formed in the Absence of Treatment, Combined Prog-Device Treated Animals Regenerate Complex Patterned Paddle-like Structures
(A-D) Anatomical outcome (left) and X-ray images (right) of regenerates formed in adult Xenopus hindlimb amputation after no treatment (Ctrl, A) and after 24-hr combined treatment of drug-loaded device (Prog-device, B-D).
(A) Red arrow indicates the hypomorphic cartilaginous structure, spike, lacking specialized tissues.
(B-D) Green arrows on soft tissue images (left panels) indicate the dense and sprouted vascularization, easily visualized due to unpigmented epithelium covering the regenerates of treated PD7 (B), PD5 (C), and PD1 (D) animals. X-ray images (right panels) show the new bone growth within the regenerates of treated PD7 (B), PD5 (C), and PD1 (D) animals (weakly ossified bone close to the amputation plane, green arrows; non-ossified bone or regenerated cartilage traveling toward the distal part, turquoise arrows in B-D; magenta arrow in A indicates the absence of bone regeneration in the distal spike). Individual identification of each animal is indicated in white (Ctrl: untreated control, PD: Prog-device treated, followed by the individual number).
(E) Shape profiles, as obtained after MorphoJ software measurements (see Figure S2B for details), for untreated (red) and Prog-device treated animals (green). Each circle indicates the average position for each landmark, after computations for n = 3 and n = 7 animals in Ctrl and Prog-device groups, respectively. Quantification and statistical analysis of these shape states showed significant differences in the Mahalanobis distance (p < 0.05) for the profile of the shape of the regenerate.
(F) Application of RI to regenerates at both 2.5 and 9.5 mpa (two-way ANOVA, p < 0.01 for "group" factor). Scatterplots are presented in which each dot represents one animal.
(G and H) Quantification of regenerated limb length (a' + b') relative to uncut limbs (a + b) revealed that the regenerating hindlimb stops growing at a point at which, under normal growth conditions, the animal's digits appear (yellow arrows) (G). Values in (H) are represented with scatterplot, in which each dot represents one animal.
See also Tables S1 and S2.

[PAGE 11] Figure 4. Prog-Device Treated Animals Show Significantly Greater Innervation and Vascularization than Untreated Animals at the Most Distal Part of the 9.5-mpa Regenerate, with Patterns Closer to Uncut (Intact) Limbs
(A-D) Low-magnification immunofluorescence images of DAPI-counterstained cross-sections revealing innervation (anti-acetylated α-tubulin antibody [Tub]) and vascularization (anti-smooth-muscle actin antibody [SMA]) of amputated untreated (Ctrl) and amputated plus Prog-device (Prog-device) treated animals. The overall area occupied by Tub+ fibers is significantly greater in treated tips (turquoise double-headed arrow in B, compared to magenta double-headed arrow in A). Similarly, the density and extension of the blood vessels for Prog-device treated animals (D, turquoise arrows) is higher when compared to untreated animals (C, magenta arrows). gl, SMA+ epidermal glands were not included in the analysis. Scale bars, 250 µm. The cartilage core of the 9.5-mpa regenerates is indicated in (A). For a schematic representation of the plane cut, see Figure S5A.
(E and F) Quantitative results of number of positive units per square millimeter and area per unit for Tub (E) and SMA (F) immunofluorescence in Ctrl (red) and Prog-device groups (green). Values are represented with scatterplots, in which each dot represents one histological section, and each dot style represents one animal (with at least three histological sections). Statistical analysis was performed on the pooled individual sections. Horizontal line indicates mean. p values after Mann-Whitney test (unequal variances) or t test (equal variances; only for E, left) are indicated as **p < 0.01.
(G-N) High-magnification images revealed that while in untreated animals, the typical nerve patterning is composed of individual and unpatterned nerve fibers (magenta arrows in G), Tub+ axons in Prog-device animals show a tendency to group organization, forming bundles (turquoise line-encircled areas in H), similar to the nerve organization in intact or uncut limbs (turquoise line-encircled areas in I and J). Both the number and morphology and area of the SMA+ vessels for Prog-device tips were clearly closer to the intact limb (turquoise arrow and asterisks in L, M, and N) than to the Ctrl untreated limbs (small vessels indicated by magenta arrows in K). See Table S4 for quantitative data. Scale bars, 100 µm.
See also Figure S5 and Table S3.

[PAGE 12] Figure 5. Locomotor Activity in Prog-Device Treated Animals Resembles More Closely that of Uncut Animals
(A) Quantifications of efficient activity levels, measured by counting the number of active movements (with trajectory displacement). Values are represented as mean ± SD (n = 4 animals per group). One-way ANOVA p < 0.01. p values after Bonferroni's post hoc analysis are indicated as *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ns, p > 0.05.
(B) Surfacing frequency or number of visits to the water-air surface performed by each experimental group per time unit (minute). Values are represented as mean ± SD (n = 4 animals per group). One-way ANOVA p < 0.01. p values after Bonferroni's post hoc analysis are indicated as *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ns, p > 0.05.
(C) Graphic representation of the percentage of time spent in each quadrant of the tank per experimental group. Unbiased exploration (black line) is shown as reference (25% of time in each quadrant). Analysis of the time distributions within each experimental group showed clear significant differences (p < 0.01 for X² (0.05,9)). Data represent the pooled distribution of animals per group (see Figure S6A for contingency graph).
(D) Mean speed (expressed in centimeters per second) at which each animal (represented by individual dots) swims around the tank. Orange squares, uncut or intact animals; green circles, amputated animals followed by Prog-device combined treatment; red triangles, amputated animals without additional treatment.
See also Figure S6.

[PAGE 13] Transcriptome Analysis Identifies Unique Key Genes and Cell Processes Exclusively Regulated by the Prog-Containing Bioreactor
Given the long-term anatomical and functional outcomes obtained after only 24 hr of treatment, we sought downstream mechanisms underlying the response. To characterize the molecular events taking place between device exposure and subsequent responses, we conducted RNA sequencing (RNA-seq) and compared the transcriptome analysis of the blastema for Ctrl (amputated and untreated), Sham (amputated and treated with only hydrogel device, no drug) and Prog-device (amputated and treated with hydrogel device filled with drug) animals. Read counts, mapping metrics, and alignment percentages of samples to the Xenopus genome are provided in Table S5. The alignment percentages for the 9 samples ranged between 54.91% and 68.34% (mean 0.69%, SD 4.99%). The number of differentially expressed genes (DEGs) was determined after multiple testing corrected the p value. The Q value was set at a false discovery rate (FDR) of 0.05, and differentially expressed genes were considered to be those transcripts passing this FDR and those showing a log2 fold change of 2. When comparing blastema (BL) of Sham versus Ctrl groups, there was a total of 66 differentially expressed genes. This number was dramatically increased when comparing the blastema of Prog-device versus Ctrl animals, with a total of 531 differentially expressed genes (Figure 6A; all differentially expressed transcripts are provided in Data S1). Considering the highest response (more than log2 = 4.0), amputation followed by only hydrogel device attachment, Sham, when compared to Ctrl, induced a significant downregulation of nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NADH) dehydrogenase (ubiquinone) 1 beta subcomplex subunit 10-like, zinc-finger protein 850-like, and enhancer of polycomb homolog 1-like transcripts, among others. Transcripts that were highly upregulated after Sham intervention, when compared to Ctrl, included SMAD family member 4, olfactory receptor 51L1-like, and capZ-interacting protein-like transcripts (for the complete list of genes that show more than log2 = 4.0, see Table S6). The combined treatment after amputation (hydrogel device filled with drug, Prog-device group), when compared to Ctrl, resulted in the downregulation in the blastema of neuropeptides and signaling molecules such as prolactin, arginine vasopressin, somatostatin, cholinergic receptor nicotinic alpha 7 subunit, RAS-like family 12, engulfment and motility (ELMO) domain containing 1, and olfactory receptor family 52 subfamily D member 1, among others. Examples of transcripts that were upregulated after Prog-device treatment included histone H2B 1.2, superoxide dismutase 3, multiple inositol-polyphosphate phosphatase 1 L homolog, nuclear pore complex protein Nup214-like, transmembrane protein 256, and selenoprotein F (for a complete list of genes with more than log2 = 4.0, see Table S6).
The differences between Sham and Prog-device groups were also clearly notable in the subnetwork enrichment analysis (SNEA; Figure 6B). There were 18,718 (Sham) and 18,762 (Prog-device) entities (or transcripts) that were mapped successfully to Pathway Studio (Elsevier), depending on the treatment. There were 150 networks that were enriched and altered in the blastema after the Sham intervention, while the combined Prog-device approach led to the enrichment of up to 190 different and specific pathways (both cases when compared to Ctrl group; Figure 6B).
To reveal the types of processes regulated by our intervention, we grouped the