[PAGE 1] Title
The Bioelectrics of Immortality and Mortality in Cold-Sensitive Hydra oligactis

[PAGE 1] Authors
Stefania E. Kapsetaki¹, Michael Levin 1,2,3,*

[PAGE 1] Affiliations
1 Department of Biology, Tufts University, Medford, MA 02155, United States
2 Allen Discovery Center at Tufts University, Medford, MA 02155, United States
3 Wyss Institute for Biologically Inspired Engineering, Harvard University, Boston, MA 02115, United States
* Corresponding author
E-mail: michael.levin@allencenter.tufts.edu

[PAGE 1] Keywords:
bioelectric map, bioelectric atlas, cnidaria, hydrozoa, bioelectric pattern, membrane voltage, Vmem, resting potential

[PAGE 1] Running title:
Bioelectrics of Hydra

[PAGE 2] Abstract
Bioelectric properties of cells are an important aspect of development, regeneration, and cancer. Because of their relevance to establishment and maintenance of tissue form and function, bioelectric patterns have been hypothesized to have a role in aging. However, no data on bioelectric patterns of the whole body of young and old individuals have been available. We observed and quantified the bioelectrics of whole-body immortal (growing at 22°C) and aging mortal (growing at 10°C) cold-sensitive (CS) Hydra oligactis. We found that the membrane-voltage-sensitive dyes FluoVolt and VF2.1.Cl can be used to reveal large-scale patterns of cellular membrane resting voltage potentials in Hydra. The consensus whole-body bioelectric atlas of immortal H. oligactis shows a consistently depolarized foot, and occasionally depolarized tentacles. Immortal hydra are on average more depolarized and exhibit less sharply-defined bioelectric patterns than old mortal hydra. Immortal hydra have a sharper foot:central body ratio than old mortal hydra. These data establish hydra as the first model system in which whole-body bioelectric imaging can be performed; the different bioelectric patterns of immortal versus old mortal hydra are consistent with a bioelectric component to the aging process and suggest a roadmap for using this model organism in anti-aging therapeutic screens involving electroceuticals.

[PAGE 3] Introduction
Aging presents as a severe, progressive reduction in functional capacity and quality of life with a 100% penetrance 1, 2. It also presents fascinating fundamental questions in evolutionary, cell, and developmental biology with respect to the algorithms implemented by living tissues to maintain form and function against disorder 3-12. Numerous theories of the underlying molecular causes of aging have been proposed 13-21. One set of approaches focuses on the progressive degradation of developmental information cues that allow tissues to maintain a complex morphology for decades while materials and individual cells move in and out of the body. Since one key aspect of this information structure is maintained in bioelectrical gradients of resting potential across tissues (reviewed in 22-24), it has been suggested that degradation of specifically bioelectric information could be a cause of aging 25, 26.
Patterns of cellular resting potential (Vmem) have been measured in a variety of embryonic, regenerative, and oncogenic contexts 27-31, due to the known role of developmental bioelectricity in regulating morphogenesis and cancer suppression (reviewed in 22, 23). However, no data are currently available on large-scale bioelectric profiles during aging in vivo in any model species. This is a rate-limiting step in the development of electroceuticals for longevity. Moreover, additional bioelectricity-relevant approaches involve applying specific electromagnetic fields and pulsed electromagnetic fields to slow down aging 32-34, performing transcranial direct current stimulation and transcranial magnetic stimulation to improve the declining cognitive functions 35, 36, regulating the body's ion channels with morphoceuticals 37, 38 or gero-electroceuticals 39, bioelectrically controlling stem cells such as their ability to differentiate or continue regenerating 40, and regulating the restoration of the body's aging bioelectrics with implantable and wearable bioelectronic devices 41. Evaluating, improving, and extending these pioneering approaches require a better understanding of the bioelectric pattern of young versus old individuals. Thus, we sought to establish a dataset on whole-body bioelectric imaging in a model system that is relevant for aging research 42-44.
Hydra are relatively small fresh-water invertebrates. They have endodermal and ectodermal tissues, and can reproduce both sexually and asexually 45. They have been used as a model organism in many studies 46 focusing on their development, regenerative abilities, transplantation biology 46, tumor biology 47-49, whole-body neural and muscle activity via calcium imaging 50-52, and aging 53, 54. Their body is transparent, enabling membrane-voltage (Vmem)-sensitives dyes 55-57 to easily penetrate and reveal cellular membrane voltage of the whole organism. At 22°C, cold-sensitive (CS) Hydra oligactis are immortal. However, at 10°C, CS H. oligactis begin to switch to sexual reproduction and produce ovaries and testes within 3-4 weeks 58, 59. Within 30 days at 10°, CS H. oligactis undergo aging 60 and eventually die by day 150 60. It is known that 80% of the human aging genes from the Human Ageing Genomic Resources (http://genomics.senescence.info) are conserved in hydra 54. Aging CS H. oligactis are less able to grab prey, perform spontaneous contractions, and transfer food to their gut, have fewer sperm and nurse cells after 30 days, fewer numbers of interstitial stem cells, and more epithelial cells 60. This makes hydra an ideal model system in which to begin to test hypotheses about the role of bioelectrics in the aging process. However, the bioelectrics of whole-body immortal and aging hydra are unknown.
We established an imaging protocol for this species and tested the hypothesis that bioelectric patterns (non-homogenous spatial distributions of Vmem) would exist, and would change with aging, especially becoming less crisp and more diffuse (degradation of prepattern as observed during some birth defects 61). Moreover, we tested the prediction that aging CS H. oligactis would be more hyperpolarized than immortal CS H. oligactis.


[PAGE 4] Methods
Hydra husbandry and shrimp maintenance
We obtained CS Hydra oligactis from Brigitte Galliot's lab. We grew the hydra in media consisting of 0.294 g CaCl2, 0.07 g MgSO4, 0.08 g NaHCO3, and 0.004 g KCI per 2 L of Dl water. We stored the hydra in 150 x 15mm plastic Petri dishes (maximum 50 hydra per dish) in a light:dark 16:8 h cycle incubator at 22°C. We transferred the hydra to a new Petri dish with fresh liquid approximately every 2 weeks. We grew artemia shrimps in a plastic cone oxygenated with an air pump in a light:dark 16:8 h cycle incubator at 22°C. The plastic cone had approximately 300 mL of artemia brine shrimp media (25 g NaCl and 0.5 g sodium bicarbonate per 1L of DI) and 0.5 g of artemia brine shrimp egg microcysts. We repeated the artemia brine shrimp growing process from artemia brine shrimp egg microcysts on Tuesdays and Fridays. We fed the hydra approximately 1-4 artemia brine shrimps per hydra on Mondays, Tuesdays, Thursdays, and Fridays.

[PAGE 4] Aging induction
In the beginning of the experiment, after a month since the beginning, after two months since the beginning, and after three months since the beginning, we imaged four hydra from a CS H. oligactis culture growing at 22°C and four hydra from a CS H. oligactis culture growing at 10°C. After four months since the beginning of the experiment, we imaged eight hydra from the CS H. oligactis culture growing at 22°C and eight hydra from the CS H. oligactis culture growing at 10°C.

[PAGE 4] Dyeing and imaging the hydra
We performed the following steps in order to dye and image the hydra. On the confocal microscope we set the chamber temperature at 18°C and 40% air flow. We used the 25X objective (HC Fluotar L Visir 25x/0.95 water) with drops of ultra-pure water on the objective. In the Leica Application Suite X (LASX) software we used the following settings: 1024 x 1024 dimensions; bidirectional mode turned on; line accumulation: 9; speed: 700 Hz; numerical aperture: 0.95; WLL ON at 85% and maximum power; PinholeAiry: 1AU; laser line (510 nm) and intensity 1.5%; spectral position: 528nm – 617nm; gain = 10.
We prepared the dye solution for multiple hydra on the day of imaging using 2mL-Eppendorf tubes. Specifically, we used the following volumes per hydra: FluoVolt (0.5µL), (https://www.thermofisher.com/order/catalog/product/F10488) powerload (https://www.thermofisher.com/order/catalog/product/P10020) (12.5µL), Neuro Background Suppressor 10X (12.5µL), and hydra media (224.5µL). We stored the Eppendorf tubes in the dark at room temperature until using them for each hydra in the next few hours. We collected the hydra from the 22°C incubator and then once finished imaging the 22°C hydra we imaged the hydra that were growing in the 10°C incubator. We placed a hydra in 250µL of the dye solution in a well of a 24-well plate. We set a timer for 5min. We then cut a cover slip on the sides so that it fitted in the middle of an ibidi dish (https://ibidi.com/35-mm-dishes/176--dish-35-mm-high-glass-bottom.html#/29-surface modification- 15h 170 m 5 m d 263 m schott glass sterilized/30-pcs box-60 individually packed). We placed mylokote glue on two opposite sides of the ibidi dish (enough glue so that the cover slip could later touch on both sides of the glue). Once the 5min had passed, we washed the well approximately 5 times with hydra media using a different plastic pipette each time. We collected the hydra with a plastic pipette and placed it in the middle of the ibidi dish. We placed the cover slip gently on top of the ibidi dish. We took a 10µL tip with the ibidi dish to the confocal microscope. We placed some additional ultra pure droplets on the confocal 25X objective if needed, so that the liquid touched the bottom of the ibidi dish. We started applying pressure on the sides of the cover slip where the mylokote glue was until the mylokote glue did not

[PAGE 5] visibly move much further towards the center of the ibidi dish. We made sure the mylokote glue did not touch the hydra. We placed the ibidi dish on the confocal microscope stage. We switched the line repetitions on the LASX software to 1, went to tiling mode, and clicked on fast live. We focused on the surface of the hydra by adjusting the Z plane. We clicked on spiral and identified the whole body of the hydra. We stopped the spiral. Using the polygon tool, we selected the region of interest (the whole hydra). We turned the line repetitions to 9, clicked start, and on the image that was being processed we clicked on the "Pixel binding" option to convert it to 2. For every image we clicked on “fit”, then “FLIM image fit", and used count threshold = 1. The maximum time that the hydra was being imaged under the confocal was 5 minutes. We then continued dyeing and then imaging the next hydra.

[PAGE 5] Image analysis of the aging experiment
We obtained the mean lifetime intensity and brightness whole-body images of each FluoVolt-dyed hydra from the LASX software. We transferred these two images of each hydra on ImageJ. We also transferred and ran the following file (Supplementary File 1) on ImageJ. Downloading this file (Supplementary File 2) is also required. We then transferred and ran this file (Supplementary File 3) on ImageJ. In the case of the last file, we manually drew a line surrounding the hydra with the polygon tool. We used the rotation tool to rotate the hydra so that its anterior side was facing the left and its posterior side was facing the right. We then transferred and ran the following code on ImageJ (Supplementary File 4). The output values from ImageJ were mean lifetime intensity values across the whole body of the hydra. We transferred these values to Excel, calculated the mean value of the mean lifetime intensity, and the 1st derivate of these values along the body of the hydra. We also measured the absolute value of the 1st derivative, and the average of the absolute value of the 1st derivative. The output values from ImageJ also provided values of the x axis (1 until the total length of the hydra). In order to normalize to the varied length of each hydra, we multiplied each position by 100/(the last x value of the hydra). For example, the last region of the hydra was the 100% region.
To compare the central region and foot region of the hydra we removed the tentacles by not selecting the tentacles when drawing a line around the hydra on ImageJ. We used the mean lifetime intensity data from the output of this ImageJ analysis and we divided the mean lifetime intensity of the last 4 regions of each hydra (approximately 83-100% of their body length) by the mean lifetime intensity of the region that was closest to 50% (of the body length of the hydra).
To measure bioelectric sharpness (Moran's I) of the whole-body of the hydra we transferred the mean lifetime intensity image of the hydra to ImageJ. We adjusted the brightness and contrast so that we could observe the edges of the hydra without applying those settings. Then we ran the following .lut file (Supplementary File 2). Then for each image, we cropped the region of interest (whole body of the hydra) using the polygon tool, and ran the following macros (Supplementary File 3). Then, we reset the brightness and contrast settings. We saved the image on the desktop as a TIFF format file. We then ran these two scripts (Supplementary files 5 & 6) in Idle 62.

[PAGE 5] Consensus bioelectric map of the hydra
To make a bioelectric atlas/map of every hydra we analyzed separately the mean lifetime intensity whole-body data of the immortal hydra versus the mean lifetime intensity whole-body data of the old mortal hydra. We plotted the mean values of mean lifetime intensity of each hydra that was growing for 2 months (4 hydra), 3 months (4 hydra), and 4 months (8 hydra) at 22°C against the percentage of its body length on the x axis, and the mean values of mean lifetime intensity of each hydra that was growing for 2 months (4 hydra), 3 months (4 hydra), and 4 months (8 hydra) at 10°C against the percentage of its body length on the x axis.


[PAGE 6] Image analysis of the VF2.0.Cl versus VF2.1.Cl and FluoVolt-dyed hydra
We dyed three three-and-a-half-month old CS H. oligactis for 5min with 250µL of the following
solution (1.5µL of the VF2.1.Cl dye from a 1mM stock solution 63, 37.5µL powerload, 37.5µL Neuro
Background Suppressor 10X, and 673.5µL hydra media). We dyed three three-and-a-half-month old CS H.
oligactis for 5min with 250µL of the following solution (1.5µL of the VF2.0.Cl dye from a 1mM stock
solution 63, 37.5µL powerload, 37.5µL Neuro Background Suppressor 10X, and 673.5µL hydra media). We
dyed three three-and-a-half-month old CS H. oligactis for 5min with 250µL of the following solution (1.5µL
of the FluoVolt dye, 37.5µL powerload, 37.5µL Neuro Background Suppressor 10X, and 673.5µL hydra
media). We performed this procedure separately for each hydra. After the 5min exposure to the dye in a
well of a 24-well plate, we washed the well 4-5 times with hydra media. We placed mylokote glue on two
opposite sides of an ibidi dish and moved the hydra with a plastic pipette to the middle of the ibidi dish.
We slowly applied pressure on the sides of the cover slip, where the mylokote glue was, and imaged the
hydra under the confocal microscope using the LasX software and the 25X objective. We used the
following settings for all three dyes: 1024 x 1024 dimensions; bidirectional mode turned on, line
accumulation: 9; speed: 700 Hz; numerical aperture: 0.95; WLL ON at 85% and maximum power; and
PinholeAiry: 1AU. For imaging the FluoVolt-dyed hydra we used laser line (510 nm) and intensity 1.5%;
spectral position: 528nm – 617nm; and gain = 10. Whereas for imaging the VF2.1.Cl- and VF2.0.Cl-dyed
hydra we used laser line (510 nm) and intensity 30%; spectral position: 533nm – 622nm; and gain = 10.
On the images that were being processed we clicked on the “Pixel binding" option to convert it to 2. Also,
for every image we clicked on “fit”, then “FLIM image fit", and used count threshold = 1.
We obtained the mean lifetime intensity and brightness whole-body images of the VF2.0.CI-,
VF2.1.Cl-dyed, versus FluoVolt-dyed hydra from the LASX software. We dragged these images on the
ImageJ software. In the brightness image of each hydra, we looked for 6 neighboring cells in the foot
region, and drew a circle around them in the mean lifetime intensity image to measure the average mean
lifetime intensity of that region. We also found 6 neighboring cells from the middle region of brightness
image of the hydra with maximum ±1 difference in brightness intensity. We drew a circle around those
cells in the same position in the mean lifetime intensity image in order to measure the average mean
lifetime intensity of those cells. We then compared the average mean lifetime intensity values of those
two regions across the different conditions (VF2.0.Cl- versus VF2.1.Cl-dyed versus FluoVolt-dyed hydra).

[PAGE 6] Statistical analyses
We performed all statistical analyses in R version 4.4.0 64. When the data followed an
approximately normal distribution (P-value > 0.05 in Shapiro's test 65) and we were comparing three or
more different groups, we used an Analysis of Variance (ANOVA) test. If the data did not follow a normal
distribution (P-value < 0.05 in Shapiro's test 65) and we were comparing three or more different groups,
we performed the Kruskal-Wallis test 66. When the data did not follow a normal distribution (P-value >
0.05 in Shapiro's test 65) and we were comparing two different groups, we performed the Wilcoxon rank
sum exact test 67, 68.

[PAGE 7] Results
Vmem-sensitive dye reveals relative membrane voltage of every cell along the hydra's body
In order to determine whether we can use immortal and mortal CS H. oligactis as a model system to see the relative membrane voltage of every cell, we ran an imaging protocol with the Vmem-sensitive dye FluoVolt. We were able to see the relative membrane voltage of every cell in alive immortal and mortal CS H. oligactis (Supplementary Figure 1). Depending on the CS H. oligactis' body contraction or expansion at the exact time point of imaging, some cells appeared more elongated (e.g., anterior-right region of the hydra in Supplementary Figure 1A), while other cells appeared less elongated (e.g., anterior-right region of the hydra Supplementary Figure 1B). Therefore, our dyeing technique can reveal the whole-body bioelectric atlas of immortal and mortal CS H. oligactis.

[PAGE 7] Vmem-sensitive dyes FluoVolt and VF2.1.Cl show relative membrane voltage and not artifacts
In order to test whether the Vmem-sensitive dyes FluoVolt and VF2.1.Cl do report relative membrane voltage of CS H. oligactis cells, we compared the average arrival time of old mortal CS H. oligactis dyed with FluoVolt, VF2.1.Cl, or the Vmem-insensitive dye VF2.0.CI. In old mortal CS H. oligactis dyed with FluoVolt (N = 3) or VF2.1.CI (N = 3) we saw that the average arrival time of the foot region was longer than the average arrival time of the central body region. However, in old mortal CS H. oligactis dyed with the Vmem-insensitive dye VF2.0.CI (N = 3), the foot and central body regions had on average a similar average arrival time (Figure 1). The absence of the characteristic voltage pattern when using the closely-related but voltage-unresponsive VF2.0.Cl dye suggests that the signals we reported indeed show relative membrane voltage of hydra cells and unlikely to be due to artifacts unrelated to voltage.

[PAGE 7] Immortal hydra have bioelectrically distinct body parts
In order to find the consensus bioelectric atlas of immortal CS H. oligactis, we imaged CS H. oligactis growing at 22°C with the Vmem-sensitive dye FluoVolt. We saw that the majority of immortal hydra had a depolarized foot. Some immortal hydra had depolarized tentacles. Other regions of the immortal hydra did not have such consistent membrane voltage among different individuals. For example, the mouth region and central body of the hydra varied in membrane voltage among the different individuals (Figure 2; N = 6). Therefore, the consensus whole-body bioelectric atlas of immortal hydra showed some consistently bioelectrically distinct regions, such as the depolarized foot, and some bioelectrically variable regions, such as the depolarized tentacles, the mouth, and central body.

[PAGE 7] Cold-Sensitive H. oligactis age at 10°C
In order to confirm whether CS H. oligactis age at 10°C, we looked for ovaries or testes on the body of the hydra since gametogenesis in these hydra is a sign of irreversible aging 59, 69. CS H. oligactis that had been growing for 78 days at 10°C had visible ovaries/testes (Supplementary Figure 2). Therefore, we conclude that in our assays, CS H. oligactis do indeed age at 10°C.

[PAGE 7] Aging hydra have bioelectrically different bodies than immortal hydra
In order to test whether aging and immortal hydra have bioelectrically distinct bodies, we grew cultures of CS H. oligactis in 10°C versus 22°C incubators for 4 months and imaged the relative membrane voltage across the hydras' bodies using the Vmem-sensitive dye FluoVolt. The technical replicates, i.e., two whole-body images from the same individual, varied in mean lifetime intensity (Table 1). Both groups, the technical replicates of the immortal and old mortal hydra, had similar standard deviations (Table 1: 4-46 picoseconds in the case of immortal hydra, and 4-47 picoseconds in the case of old mortal hydra). By analyzing one image of the whole body of each hydra, the standard deviation among the biological replicates of Figure 3 and Figure 4A was 101 picoseconds in the case of immortal hydra and 79 picoseconds in the case of old mortal hydra. We saw that the bodies of old mortal CS H. oligactis, that had been growing for 2, 3, or 4 months at 10°C, were on average more hyperpolarized (Nimmortal = 16, Nold mortal = 16; Figure 3; Figure 4A: p < 0.0001) and bioelectrically sharper (Nimmortal = 16, Nold mortal = 16; Figure 4B; p = 0.03) than immortal CS H. oligactis, that had been growing for 2, 3, or 4 months at 22°C. The foot-to-central body ratio of old mortal hydra was not as bioelectrically sharp as that of immortal hydra (Nimmortal = 16, Nold mortal = 16; Figure 5; p = 0.01). Therefore, the bodies of old mortal and immortal hydra have distinct average relative membrane voltage and sharpness of different body regions.

[PAGE 8] Discussion
This study provides a consensus whole-body bioelectric atlas of living immortal and mortal CS H. oligactis. We confirmed that CS H. oligactis were aging at 10°C since they had formed ovaries/testes within 78 days, an indication that this strain is undergoing irreversible aging 59, 69.
Our results showed that in this model system, the FluoVolt and VF2.1.Cl dyes were showing Vmem of the plasma membrane and not artifacts, as revealed by the lack of signal from a closely-related control dye that is not responsive to membrane potential. This control has been used in cultures of rat hippocampal neurons, human cardiomyocytes, human embryonic kidney cells 70-72, and the tails of alive frog embryos 73, but is not common and should be universally used in voltage dye studies.
Prior efforts have mapped action potentials of the anterior region of the guinea pig's heart (e.g., 74, 75), resting potential patterns in bacterial biofilms 76, central regions of poplar leaves 77 and stem and leaf of sunflowers Helianthus annuus 78, the optic tectum region of the frog brain 79, the olfactory bulb of the salamander Ambystoma tigrinum 80, 81, faces, brains, and tails of frog embryos 30, 73, 82, olfactory bulb of zebrafish 83, 84, olfactory bulb of box turtles Terepene triunguis 85, an embryonic precontractile chick heart 86, the pig heart 87, mouse heart 75, 88, and the primary somatosensory cortex of the mouse brain 89. We show for the first time the relative membrane voltage of alive cells across the whole body of 38 whole organisms. Certain properties of hydra and technological advances have made this possible. Specifically, the transparency of hydra has enabled Vmem-sensitive dyes to easily penetrate the hydra and be observed under the confocal microscope using FLIM that shows the relative membrane voltage of each cell.
One of the key aspects of bioelectric patterns is that in some systems (Xenopus embryo, regenerating planaria, chick embryo), their distribution has been shown to serve as an instructive signal for morphogenesis 30, 90-93. Thus, we were very interested in differences in Vmem across the hydra that would correspond to distinct anatomical features. We found that the CS H. oligactis foot was more depolarized than other regions of the hydra's body. The tentacles of the CS H. oligactis were also relatively depolarized in some individual hydra. This relative depolarization may relate to the adhesive properties of the foot and secretory properties of the hydra's tentacles. The hydra's foot (also called basal disc) secretes granules that contain glycans and/or glycoproteins allowing the hydra to stick on surfaces 94. Although the resting membrane potential of the secretory cells of the foot has not been previously reported, other secretory cells, called nematocytes, in the tentacles of Hydra vulgaris are known to require apical plasma membrane depolarization for the secretion of stenoteles 95.
As with any biological parameter, we observed some variability across animals. The standard deviation in mean lifetime intensity was higher among the biological than among the technical replicates. Specifically, the standard deviation in mean lifetime intensity among the biological replicates of the data shown in Figure 3 and Figure 4A was 101 and 79 picoseconds in the case of the immortal hydra and old mortal hydra, respectively. Whereas the standard deviation in mean lifetime intensity among the technical replicates (N = 2; Table 1) was 4-46 picoseconds in the case of four immortal hydra and 4-47 picoseconds in the case of four old mortal hydra. Although the standard deviation in mean lifetime intensity of the technical replicates was only measured from two technical replicates, the higher standard deviation in the case of the biological replicates than the technical replicates indicates that each hydra does not have the exact same whole-body mean lifetime intensity than other hydra. There tends to be more interindividual variation in the bioelectric pattern of hydra than temporal (1-3 minute) variation in the bioelectric pattern of a single individual. In other words, the lower standard deviation in the case of the technical replicates, versus biological replicates, indicates that data within the ~4-47 picosecond standard deviation could be considered temporal intraindividual variation ('noise') and data beyond the ~47 picosecond standard deviation could be considered interindividual variation (‘signal'). Future work on the functional role of this parameter in Hydra biology will be necessary because it is the precision of interpretation of the voltage profile by body systems that would determine the degree of precision that is physiologically important.
One basic bioelectric parameter to compare in living samples is simply the overall average level of polarization. With respect to this, we found a more hyperpolarized bioelectric pattern in the whole body of old mortal than immortal hydra. What we found was reasonable for four reasons. First, we would expect the immortal hydra's foot and tentacles to be relatively depolarized, due to the depolarization required for excretion of substances in secretory cells present in those regions. If this depolarization becomes dysregulated during aging, we would expect old hydra to be on average more hyperpolarized than immortal CS H. oligactis. Second, interstitial stem cells give rise to several cell types, including secretory cells, nematocytes, nerve cells, and germ cells 96. Interstitial stem cells decrease in numbers in aging hydra 96 and this may lead to a decrease in the interstitial-stem-cell-derived depolarization-activated nematocytes in aging hydra. Prior data connect resting potential to the maintenance of stem cells 97-100. Third, stem cells are usually relatively depolarized 101, and the decrease in interstitial stem cells in aging hydra may mean that these hydra become more hyperpolarized. Fourth, hyperpolarization of the plasma membrane is known to determine actin fiber compaction in cultures of bovine epithelial cells 102, and actin fibers appear disrupted in aging H. oligactis 60. Thus, although these two processes happen in very evolutionary distant species, the disrupted actin fibers of aging hydra may be due to cell hyperpolarization.
There seems to be some variety across organisms in terms of the relationship of polarization level to aging. For example, Type II neurons in the bed nucleus of the stria terminalis are more hyperpolarized in aged mice than young mice 103. In rats, old versus young hippocampal CA1 neurons did not have significantly different resting membrane potentials 104. Also, there was not a significant difference in the resting membrane potential of old versus young pyramidal neurons of the prefrontal cortex of rhesus monkeys 105. In female and male mouse bladder cells, the mRNA expression of hyperpolarization-activated cyclic nucleotide-gated (HCN) channel hcn1 decreases with age 106. If hnc1 expression is lower and production of HCN1 proteins is decreased in aging hydra, this may explain the potential inability of cells to maintain their depolarized state as they age, i.e. our finding that older mortal hydra are more hyperpolarized than immortal hydra.
In addition to average polarization, it is interesting to consider the crispness of the bioelectric pattern itself: the degree to which bioelectric patterns sharply distinguish compartments with different Vmem 22, 107. In embryos, a number of teratogens that disrupt developmental morphogenesis do so by making the bioelectric prepattern less sharp 61, 108. For example, in the Xenopus brain this is known to be the case for chemical and genetic teratogens; crucially, brain morphogenesis, gene expression, and even learning rates can be restored despite exposure to nicotine, ethanol, or mutation of the Notch gene by artificially forcing the bioelectric pattern to become sharper (via overexpression of the HCN2 ion channel) 109-111. We previously suggested the hypothesis that aging could involve a change of the sharpness of the bioelectrical pattern 25 and indeed hcn1 expression decreases with age in mice 106. We thus quantified here the sharpness of the bioelectrical patterns in immortal and aging hydra. We found a sharper bioelectric pattern in the whole body of old mortal than immortal hydra. However, the foot-to-central body ratio pattern was less sharp in old mortal hydra. This suggests that either different organisms handle this in different ways, or more likely, the relationship between crispness of Vmem pattern and aging is not uniform across body regions.
Our work points to the need for numerous subsequent studies. In parallel with applying anti-aging bioelectric treatments (e.g., HCN2 overexpression) in hydra, it would be useful to understand the mechanisms underpinning the observed whole-body bioelectric atlas of hydra. What ion channels and pumps determine the membrane voltage of every cell? Are there particular groups of cells that have more coordinated/synchronized changes in membrane voltage than other more distant groups of cells in the hydra's body? How exactly are the known aging-related physiologies of hydra (decreased ability to capture prey, decreased ability to spontaneously contract and transfer food to the gut, fewer sperm and nurse cells after 30 days, fewer interstitial stem cells, and more epithelial cells 60) associated with the bioelectric atlas of old mortal hydra? Relative hyperpolarization of the old hydra's body may also mean a hyperpolarization of the depolarization-activated nematocytes in the hydra's tentacles, thus contributing to their decreased ability to capture food. Stem cells are usually more depolarized than other cells 101, which may explain the relatively hyperpolarized body of old mortal hydra which are known to have fewer interstitial stem cells and more epithelial cells. However, the associations between the other old physiologies and the old mortal bioelectric atlas are largely unknown. The availability of protocols for generating transgenic hydra 112-115 suggest the possibility of using optogenetics and ion channel misexpression to understand the input of bioelectrics into hydra morphogenesis and aging. Likewise, it would be interesting to understand the role, if any, of endogenous bioelectrical states and the abilities of external alternating electric fields to induce reversal and continuation of hydra morphogenesis 116.
Identification of the whole-body bioelectric atlas of immortal and aging mortal hydra is a step towards performing similar studies in other model and non-model organisms. Studying the bioelectrics of aging in different taxa across the tree of life and the evolution of bioelectric pathways will help better understand the bioelectrics of aging in clinical settings. Examining the bioelectrics of human cells and tissues in both young and elderly populations would be essential in designing best practices for early human clinical trials using morphoceuticals 37 or gero-electoceuticals 39, i.e., drugs that target cellular bioelectrics and aim to reverse aging and aging-related diseases. Comparative developmental electrophysiology across widely distributed phyla is a first step in cracking the bioelectric code toward better understanding of evolutionary physiology and the biomedicine of aging and disease.


[PAGE 10] Acknowledgements
We thank the Galliot lab for providing the cold-sensitive Hydra oligactis; Patrick McMillen for confocal training and advice on: culturing the hydra, imaging, dyeing, and VF2.1.Cl versus VF2.0.Cl image analysis; Erin Switzer for providing the artemia brine shrimps; Hamid Sediqi for sharing the code for calculating Moran's I, and to Parande Tayyebi, Patrick Erickson, Aviva Lucas-Demott, Alexandra Griffin, and Angelina Pimkina for help maintain the hydra.

[PAGE 10] Funding
This research was supported