Reading and Writing the Morphogenetic Code
Foundational White Paper of the
Allen Discovery Center at Tufts University

Dr. Michael Levin
Vannevar Bush Professor
Biology Department, and
Tufts University
Suite 4600, 200 Boston Ave.
Medford, MA 02155-4243
Tel. (617) 627-6161
Fax: (617) 627-6121
email: michael.levin@tufts.edu
http://www.drmichaellevin.org/
http://www.cellregeneration.org/

[PAGE 2] Abstract
Our ultimate goal is the top-down control of complex biological shape. The first
four years of our Center's primary work will focus on exploiting developmental
bioelectricity to understand how cell networks perform the computations that enable
them to coordinate their activity toward robust anatomical target states. Transformative
advances in birth defects, regenerative medicine, cancer, and synthetic bioengineering
require mastery of these mechanisms and computational algorithms.

Learning the rules of large-scale pattern regulation will enable the ability to
specify biological pattern and control its remodeling. Current technology and conceptual
schemes target the level of the biological "machine code" – they are all about proteins,
genes, and cells. The observables and operational parameters at this level do not refer
to large-scale shape and do not facilitate its manipulation. Thus, the field faces
complexity barriers with respect to rational control of morphology (“what genes must be
regulated, in what ways, to change the shape of the hand, or create a new eye?”).

While systems biology seeks to understand emergence of complex form from
molecular mechanisms, there is a major disconnect between the plethora of high-
resolution data and the ability to control patterning outcomes. A complementary top-
down understanding of the information-processing and computation carried out by cells
during development and regeneration is largely missing. We will address this profound
gap by building new tools to exploit endogenous bioelectric pathways that implement
high-level pattern homeostasis and control loops. This will greatly potentiate the impact
of the existing and future results of existing bottom-up reductionist approaches, and
result in highly impactful new capabilities in regenerative medicine and other fields.

We focus on the morphogenetic code: the mechanisms and information
structures by which cellular networks internally represent the target morphology, and
compute the cell activities needed at each time point to bring the body closer to that
morphology. We will of course use the standard work-horses of modern biology:
molecular genetics, biophysics, and developmental physiology. However, we will also
include new kinds of computational modeling, with techniques from statistical
mechanics and AI. One of the key unique aspects of this effort is that it will, for the first
time, deal squarely with an informational approach to morphogenesis. Truly
understanding and exploiting the morphogenetic code, especially its highly regulative
aspects, requires us to understand not only the molecules and genes involved, but also
the algorithms and computations that are performed by cell networks in making
decisions about anatomical growth and form.

We will specifically address the current lack of conceptual apparatus for asking
and answering questions of what patterning systems know, compute, and represent in
their efforts to make and maintain anatomical shapes. We will develop new techniques
and software for reading, writing, and rewriting the bioelectrical software that mediates
between the genome and morphological outcomes. The results of these four years are
expected to explore a new frontier at the boundary between biology, physics, and
information science, establishing foundational technology and concepts. The next four
years, and future efforts, will seek to transition these basic findings into applications in
regenerative medicine, cancer biology, synthetic morphology, bioengineering, and
unconventional computation.

[PAGE 3] Problem space definition
Explaining and learning to control large-scale anatomy, and its regulation toward
specific shapes, is a central unsolved problem facing modern science. At its core, it is
the task of understanding (and exploiting) the remarkable ability of biological systems to
acquire specific 3-dimensional shape: generating spatial order on many scales, from
tissues to the entire body plan. How all embryos, which begin as one stem cell (the
fertilized egg), reliably build a complex defined anatomy is a major unanswered puzzle.
However, stereotypical development is just the first manifestation of a more
fundamental property of living things: pattern homeostasis [1, 2].

The problem of reliably generating a specific shape is hard enough, but at least
the feed-forward¹ development of a zygote into a reliable anatomical outcome gives
hope that complexity theory will explain the eventual reliable emergence of a specific
structural endpoint. However, the bigger issue is dynamic morphological homeostasis:
beyond forming a single well-defined structure, many biological systems have the ability
to repair their complex shape if it's damaged in unpredictable ways [3], and remodel
themselves to fit specific anatomical criteria. For example, many types of early
embryos, when cut in half, will reorganize, and give rise to two perfect twins. The target
morphology of a particular organism is not only a static final state, but an on-going
homeostatic process that harnesses individual cell activities toward repairing and
maintaining that specific shape. This occurs during aging (as individual cells die but the
overall organism continues), regeneration (for example in species that can replace
whole limbs, eyes, and hearts), and remodeling (a tail grafted to the flank of a
salamander will, in 9 months time, be remodeled into a limb – a structure more
appropriate to its new location). This process fails during carcinogenesis, as some cells
ignore the normally tight morphogenetic controls and become in essence unicellular
organisms, defecting from the body plan to grow tumors. Masters of regeneration, such
as planaria [4, 5], have also solved the aging problem: body-wide immortality through
continuous regeneration (while individual cells senesce and die).

Thus, the profound problem before us is that of closed-loop morphogenesis: not
only forming a complex shape from constant starting conditions (the fertilized egg), but
repairing a shape under deformations that cannot be known in advance [6]. How do
systems detect when their correct shape has been altered by injury or disease, compute
what steps to take to restore their correct target morphology, and decide when to stop
growing (after their anatomical goal has been reached)? Regenerating animals rebuild
precisely what is missing, no more no less, in the face of external injuries they could not
have anticipated. When half of a planarian's head is removed, a perfect match is
restored, of the right size and orientation, and then growth stops. Such systems process
information about their current state and its deviation from the target morphology,
perform computations about what should be done next, and make decisions about what
to grow and when to stop [7, 8].

¹Note that morphogenesis is not just a problem of biology – the core issues of
complex self-assembly, robustness, and information processing among cells and
molecules, to give rise to macroscopic properties (like "organ size" and "heart is anterior
to liver") also impinge on complexity theory, information sciences, and engineering [9-
12]. They involve issues of self-organized complexity (relevant for thermodynamics and

[PAGE 4] information theory [13]), the inverse problem of managing outcome from low-level
interactions (relevant for computability and systems optimization tasks [14]), robustness,
and the control of variability (relevant for engineering and communications networks).
Progress in truly solving this problem – cracking the morphogenetic code – entails being
able to specify the desired large-scale shape of a biological structure and the properties
by which that shape will be dynamically self-maintained. It means mastery over the
guidance systems that utilize feedback and memory to harness individual subunits
(cells, pathways) toward large-scale goals like a topologically-correct structure. Control
over these processes would have transformative implications for not only biology and
medicine but many other disciplines. Studying top-down control in biology puts us at the
edge of a very interdisciplinary frontier, with many transformative implications for other
fields that must integrate across levels of organization and control.


[PAGE 5] A novel approach to overcome current fundamental gaps
The efforts of molecular biologists have made remarkable inroads into identifying
the genetic and biochemical components necessary for these capabilities. However,
there are key gaps in our understanding about what dynamics are sufficient for shape
homeostasis to occur. This is revealed for example by the impossibility of describing the
3D shape or remodeling properties of an organism or tissue given its gene-regulatory
network or genome. We simply do not know how (in the general case) to predict large-
scale patterning outcomes from the molecular-level information. The flip side of
prediction is control. Consider the process of trophic memory in antler regeneration:
some species of deer reproduce a particular rack pattern each year, but if a cut is made
in one location, subsequent years' growth will include an ectopic tine in that location
[14]. How can the stem cells at the scalp modify their genetic and biochemical pathways
so that next year, one specific area of the emergent branched structure will grow an
additional branch? The possibility that the growth zone at the scalp maintains an
encoded map of the antlers, within which to represent damage sites, and which is used
to guide subsequent growth, is a kind of model that has never been explored
mechanistically: we do not have conceptual tools today to understand how
representational pattern memory could be implemented by biochemical networks. This
is an example of a case where large-scale pattern control is not readily reducible to cell-
level pathways; however, rewriting this internal pattern memory, if we knew how,
represents a much more tractable approach to being able to modify the outcome.

The mainstream paradigm in this field is largely bottom-up: it rests on the hope
that systems biology and complexity theory will explain morphogenesis if we know all of
the necessary mechanistic details. And some aspects of patterning have been
successfully addressed this way [15-19]. However, this is not the whole story, as has
been increasingly appreciated in engineering, physics, and other disciplines [20-26].
Limb regeneration for example can be seen as a feed-forward, emergent process of cell
interaction guided by gene-regulatory networks and biochemical pathways. This model
implies that pattern-changing interventions are to be implemented by providing specific
factors in specific locations – an approach that faces important practical limitations due
to complexity. Another view of the same system is as an information-processing
homeostatic system executing these steps: 1) if damaged (current pattern doesn't
resemble encoded target pattern), then 2) issue commands to individual cells to bring
overall pattern one step closer to the target morphology; 3) if done, stop, else go back to
#2. This type of model would be defined in terms of pattern memory, anatomical
measurements, and error minimization functions, performed by cellular networks. It is
one of the foundational hypotheses of this Center that we begin, for the first time, to
seek explanations that merge information-level descriptions and control strategies with
the molecular mechanisms that implement them. A second foundational hypothesis is
that rational design of interventions that manipulate systems at the level of large-scale
pattern regulatory modules, not only molecular networks, will provide an essential and
heretofore missing level of control over large-scale shape for applications in
regenerative medicine, synthetic bioengineering, and many other areas.

Regenerative medicine will not reach its true potential until we learn to control the
endpoints we actually care about: the shape and functional structure of complex organs,
not only genes or protein levels. Our Center will work on developing an understanding
of not only mechanism but meaning, addressing the computational referents of
molecular events. Learning to control shape will require development of a "compiler”
that allows one to write instructions in terms of a “high level” language of anatomy, and
convert it to the “machine level” language of genes and proteins. The immense progress
in information technology was made possible in large part by the development of
conceptual tools integrating high-level object-oriented descriptors with the underlying
physical implementation details that could be subsumed into modular, tractable controls.
This enabled altering large-scale functional dynamics without having to address every
underlying physical detail. Several disciplines outside of developmental biology have
developed practical, quantitative formalisms for describing and analyzing causally-
potent emergent controls of complex system behavior [10, 27].

Thus, an important opportunity for fundamental advances in biology is developing
a systems-control description of pattern regulation. In complement with the essential
work of understanding the molecular details, we have to develop a cybernetic or control-
theory view of patterning systems in terms of the information they manage and the
computations they perform during pattern regulation. We currently have few conceptual
tools for modeling or investigating questions of measurement, control, decision-making,
or computation in patterning tissues [28, 29]. Almost all of the existing models are
bottom-up, and we lack the tools to quantify and manipulate what patterning systems
are measuring, storing, and computing as they remodel to specific large-scale specs.
This is highly limiting – analogous to studying behavior and cognition but being limited
only to molecules, and never speaking about higher-level descriptors like depth
perception, memory, inference, learning, goal satisfaction, etc. Another example is
doing physics by studying exclusively the motions of each molecule in a gas, and never
reaching Boyle's law and thermodynamics. Even if it were possible to do science
exclusively at the lowest level, advances in cognitive science, statistical mechanics, and
engineering have long validated the importance of integrating and controlling multiple
levels of description.

What is needed is the development of frameworks (both experimental and
conceptual) to link high-level descriptors of pattern control (defined at the anatomical
level) with the molecular pathways underlying them. We seek to develop a solid,


[PAGE 5] quantitative understanding of how large-scale information-processing capabilities of
morphogenetic systems reduce to molecular events, and how biophysical and genetic
processes integrate into systems that make decisions about things that don't exist at
that level of description (organ identity, size, and topological placement). There are
precedents for successful cross-level integration in the physical and information
sciences² [33-38], but this has not been done in the biology of patterning and cell
regulation. Achieving this would gain for biology what engineering has long exploited to
great success: modularity and top-down guidance, which enable much more efficient
prediction and control by operating at the most efficient level of intervention. Reduction
and integration also make use of “implementation independence” – the low-level details
can vary, as long as the functional control loops remain intact (the same computation
can be done on a PC or a system of pulleys and string).

Evolutionary theory, cancer biology, and many other areas are now facing the
gulf between a wealth of molecular detail and having in hand the key control parameters
of a complex biological system. Synthetic and systems biology seek to address this
largely via bottom-up approaches to programming metabolism and signaling among
single cells in culture, but the control of shape remains largely an unsolved problem.
The molecular and computational tools developed in the last decades have been ideally
suited for learning about the materials of biology. This facilitates accumulating data on
molecular interaction, at ever higher resolution, but eschews key issues of the
information content and its encoding for optimal control. Tools for bridging the gap
between molecular detail and large-scale outcomes, targeting the algorithms and
information content that could enable efficient control of anatomy, have not been built.

Such approaches will inevitably reach a limit due to the inherent complexity of,
for example, assembling a hand directly from stem cell progeny, or rewriting the subtle
pattern of the human face to ameliorate an incipient birth defect. Bottom-up strategies
face the notorious “inverse problem” the difficulty of knowing what low-level
intervention to make, in order to achieve a specific change in emergent outcomes. Ant
colony simulations can explain complex behavior by large groups of ants; but which of
the ants' few simple behaviors would we need to change, and how, to have them build
an ant-hill with a chimney with a different shape? It is easy to plot a fractal image by
iterating a formula such as Z = Z²+c, but how to find the formula that will give a specific
desired image? Iterative, emergent control systems are only predictable in one
direction, which greatly hampers control. Such inverse problems are intractable in
general, and put the goals of regenerative biologists and synthetic bioengineers into the
far future, if we cannot discover how biological systems represent key large-scale states


[PAGE 6] and the computations needed to harness molecular-level details to macroscopic
outcomes - top-down control.

It is our hypothesis that evolution achieved highly plastic, self-repairing systems
that operate not by solving inverse problems, but by exploiting modularity and feedback
loops that represent pattern goal states and computing differences among them. This
strategy (control of high-level properties) minimizes the information load on underlying
mechanisms and facilitates coherent pattern control. A thermodynamics analogy for
using these as potent control knobs is the ability to manage "temperature" and
"pressure”, not the velocity of each molecule, when regulating a boiler. Synthetic
biologists will continue to design effective building blocks, but important barriers stand in
the way of traditional systems biology approaches to understand how to derive needed
large-scale outcomes (specific patterns with self-repair capability) from those building
blocks. To transition cell-level synthetic biology to true morphogenetic engineering [39-
41], we must begin to understand how cells process information about current and
future shape outcomes.

In a sense, our approach is the necessary top-down component to today's
systems biology, learning from the modularity and information-processing capabilities of
complex animal bodies to help achieve rational design and modification of growth and
form. Our work will complement existing approaches and begin a novel way to address
this type of problem, by learning from the successful examples of top-down control in
the biological world around us. Many model systems illustrate control circuits operating
over large-scale, not only molecular properties, and we need to learn to understand and
control events at that level. The existence and transition-rules of a morphogenetic code
functioning in parallel with genes and molecular pathways, forms the “dark matter" of
biology today. Given that we want to control organ identity, placement, and topological
arrangement, how do we practically interface (at the bench) with these high-level
metrics and top-down control knobs?

[PAGE 6] Bioelectricity: an inroad to new biology
Top-down approaches have not been attempted to date (despite classical
theoretical discussions [42-45]) because current paradigms of molecular biology do not
readily reveal how cells can implement information-processing functionality that makes
decisions about large-scale properties and acts with respect to encoded goal states.
However, we do have a robust science that has done exactly this: computational
neuroscience. We definitively know from neuroscience that it is possible for cell
networks to implement memory, representation, distributed processing, and goal-
directed activity that integrates signals and provides flexible, robust outcomes – the
brain does this routinely, harnessing molecular signaling within cells toward global
cognitive states. Importantly, neither the molecular mechanisms (ion channels, electrical
synapses, and neurotransmitters) nor the algorithms of decision-making and memory
arose de novo in the brain. Instead, they evolved from far more primitive cell
communication events that brains merely optimized for speed when the CNS evolved
[46-48]. As we know from computational neuroscience and computer engineering,
networks of flexible electrically-controlled voltage gates are an ideal medium for
computation, memory, and plasticity. Crucially, all cells express these ancient
components, not just neurons.

[PAGE 7]
We conjectured years ago that bioelectrical signaling should have been exploited
by evolution as an ideal modality for mediating the modular computation and information
processing needed for top-down pattern control in development, regeneration, and
remodeling. The Levin lab has been pursuing numerous predictions of this idea, and
was the first to develop molecular approaches to monitor, model, and modify electrical
potential distributions in patterning systems in vivo [49, 50]. We [51-75] and others [76-
78] have now used these methods to test the implications of this unique hypothesis [79-
81]. This body of work has revealed that in parallel with the genetic code (ideal for
making sure the right protein components are available in the right place and time), and
the epigenetic code (used for tweaking gene expression as a function of physiological
history), there is also a bioelectric code – a dynamic distribution of electrical properties
in somatic cell networks which mediates large-scale coordinated information processing
in pattern homeostasis, orchestrating cell activity toward large-scale anatomical states.
Bioelectricity is one layer of a
complex morphogenetic field (Fig. 1)
that harnesses individual cell behavior
towards the anatomical needs of the
body. Bioelectric signals interact with
chemical gradients and various physical
forces, in numerous bi-directional loops.
However, it is not simply yet another
mechanism of single-cell control. It is a
convenient and tractable entry point for
understanding and rationally controlling
information processing that maintains
large-scale order in vivo. Much as
cadherin proteins allow gene networks
to harness the physics of adhesion [82]
and thus exploit a whole new set of dynamics for multicellularity, ion channel and
electrical synapse proteins allow cell networks to harness the unique properties of
computation and implement local and long-range signaling with extensive plasticity
(history, memory). Our efforts in this Center are focused on understanding and gaining
control of this powerful unexplored property.

Bioelectric
circuits
form when the function of ion
channels and pumps alters
resting potential, which in
turn (Fig. 2A) can affect
voltage-sensitive
channels
and electrical synapses.
These circuits can exhibit
complex dynamics in
connected cells, and form a
layer of control with their own
intrinsic behavior (and self-
organizing capabilities) that


[PAGE 8]
couples to, but is distinct from, the transcriptional networks studied by most (Fig. 2B).
We now know that modulating the dynamics of this regulatory layer enables coherent
large-scale patterning changes [83] (Fig. 2C).

Bioelectric signaling has several unique properties that make it an ideal pressure-
point for the Center's directions. First, it operates on multiple scales of organization: we
have shown that specific bioelectric states define properties at the cell [84-91], organ
[52, 53, 64], and whole organism axis [66, 73, 92] levels. Second, bioelectrical states
provide a convenient and tractable method for over-riding genome-default outcomes.
For example, modulation of voltage states can induce eye formation in body areas
where the master eye regulator Pax6 normally induce eyes [64], remodels heads to
shapes belonging to different species (despite a normal genomic sequence) [57], and
rescues normal brain patterning and function despite the presence of mutated
neurogenesis genes such as Notch [52].

Perhaps most crucially, briefly altering the bioelectric connectivity of a cellular
network enables permanent rewriting of an organism's target morphology [93]:
genomically-normal worms can be changed to a 2-headed form that regenerates with 2
heads in perpetuity, illustrating the ability to stably re-wire bioelectric circuits with
permanent changes to the overall anatomy (Fig. 3). These data identify exciting gaps in
knowledge and opportunities with respect to novel control points for reprogramming
besides genome editing: stable physiological circuits that store information.

[PAGE 8] The "bioelectric code"³ is defined as the mapping of real-time electric circuit
dynamics among tissues to the pattern-regulatory functions that cells carry out. What
we have learned, after 16 years of focused effort in this field, is that bioelectrical
signaling 1) exerts profound control over large-scale morphogenetic properties in a
range of model systems [64, 66], 2) facilitates exploiting native modularity (such as
triggers complex downstream patterning outcomes as a kind of master regulator) [75,
94], 3) is transduced by a set of known mechanisms into downstream chemical signals
(neurotransmitters and other morphogens) [65, 95] and gene transcription changes [51],
and 4) forms feedback loops with genetic pathways, often over-riding competing signals
from other modalities [64, 89, 96].

Fundamental gaps in knowledge include [9, 83, 97-102] answers to several
questions. How is the mapping defined by cells (the origin of the code)? What level(s) of
organization is the interpreter of the code (molecular networks, cells, tissues, etc.)? How
can the code be interpreted (by cells or by morphogenetic engineers)? Whence do the
initial bioelectric prepatterns arise? What are the transition rules between specific
bioelectric states? How does the code change during development, regeneration, and
aging? What is the best framework for computing interventions that can be applied to
re-write encoded pattern memories and thus control morphogenesis top-down? What
are the limits of the morphogenetic editing allowed by this code (what shapes are
possible to achieve)? Answering these questions, and harnessing new modalities for
reading and writing the bioelectric code toward pattern control would be the goal of this
inaugural Allen Discovery Center. Our work will thus have several parallel components:
understanding the information processing (theory), and developing practical mechanisms
for manipulating the pattern control loops in vivo.


[PAGE 9] Implementation plan: 1st four years

Driving vision hypotheses
• Instructive information is encoded and
communicated in tissues via bioelectric code
• This code facilitates top-down, modular
control of pattern formation
• It is possible to learn to interpret and
write the code, for modifying the information
control layer of patterning (1st 4 years)
• This will have huge implications for
evolution, regenerative medicine, birth defects,
cancer, bioengineering, and computer
architectures, all of which we can exploit via
specific applications in the subsequent 4 years.

Our sub-goals will be to (1) learn to read
the code, (2) learn to interpret the code, and
(3) learn to write the code in vivo, in complex
animal models. The intellectual mindmap of our
project components is illustrated by the
schematic on the left of this page.

Each of our efforts falls somewhere
along the scale (represented here in planarian
regeneration) from (Fig. 4A) molecular
networks (GRNs), to (Fig. 4B) bioelectric


[PAGE 10] circuits in single cells and tissues [56, 103] (image obtained from work by Alexis Pietak),
to (Fig. 4C) large-scale gradients [66, 104], to (Fig. 4D) symbolic representations of the
kind we use for AI-based model inference [105-109], to (Fig. 4E) algorithmic
descriptions of the growth process (taken from [15, 110]). The goal is to learn to control
the high-level properties such as organ placement, size, and shape (Fig. 4D,E), by
interventions that manipulate properties of networks that encode these large-scale
features (Fig. 4B). We will learn how to make changes in the algorithmic process that
regulates large-scale features (Fig. 4E) by taking advantage of the representation and
mapping of these features within cell signaling dynamics (Fig. 4B-C).

Each of the participants' subprojects contributes to a key aspect of the overall
vision and will be merged together into a multi-scale integration of low-level components
with maximal molecular realism, with high-level features (with optimal enablement of
predictive control). The current subprojects include: understanding the mechanistic
interactions between voltage and small RNA/chromatin pathways (Fig. 4 A←→B),
developing and testing models of self-organization, time-dependent evolution, and
optimal control of bioelectric patterns (Fig. 4 B←→C), identifying technologies for, and
endogenous modifiers of, bioelectric gradients (Fig. 4 C←→D), and characterizing and
exploiting mechanisms of bioelectrically-mediated decision-making on a global scale
(Fig. 4 D←→E). Each project implements the intersection of 2 components (2 panels of
the mindmap, not one) in line with the goal of ensuring that everything melds together
into a coherent body of knowledge.

Overall Approach
The morphogenetic code (Fig. 2) is a large problem; it requires new technical
capabilities and new conceptual insights, not simply more molecular “omics” data. Our
plan for the first four years of the Allen Discovery Center at Tufts is a focused attack on
this next-generation problem. The overarching approach is to develop tools and models
that facilitate the control of large-scale pattern in vivo (re-writing pattern), and gain a
mechanistic understanding of patterning systems at a computational level - the missing
flip side of molecular reduction strategies. The project will be performed not only at the
Levin lab at Tufts, but also by a set of key participants, both external faculty in specific
areas, and internal personnel. Inclusion of these other labs not only provides essential
expertise for important project areas but also enables the degree of parallelization
needed to make significant impact in a 4-year timeframe. The participants list is meant
to be kept fluid during the 8-year timeframe - early efforts will identify the most
promising inroads, and additional expertise can be brought in later as needed.

Our plan is to immediately begin to construct necessary instrumentation and
produce transgenic animal models. At the same time (year 1), work will immediately
begin on identifying mechanisms by which the bioelectric code controls, and is
controlled by, 2 key biochemical pathways that have never been linked to voltage
regulation: small RNAs and chromatin remodeling. This is an essential component to
fully dovetail bioelectrics with the existing body of mechanistic work on morphogenesis
and expand the understanding of how physiological state transitions can be expected to
regulate significant other signaling modalities. Since the DNA content of different cells in
multicellular organisms is essentially the same, cellular memory, which is key for any
developmental process, is stored, maintained and read in part by epigenetic processes.

[PAGE 11] There are multiple epigenetic layers, and in the project we will focus on the connection
of two main mechanisms, chromatin modifications and regulatory small RNAs, to
bioelectric pathways. Recent work shows that transgenerational memory can be
transmitted in part through heritable small RNAs and chromatin marks [111]. In some
model organisms, it is now clear that the expression of every gene in the genome is
further regulated by heritable epigenetic information; thus, information encoded
epigenetically allows both stable and dynamic control over gene expression [112].
Bioelectric gradients are an ideal mechanism for allowing cell-level memory (mediated
by small RNAs and chromatin states) to amplify into body-wide stable pattern storage.

By year 2 we will be constructing quantitative models of the bioelectric code at
several levels (Fig. 4), and begin developing specific proof-of-principle applications that
test, validate, refine, and utilize those models to predict the nature of novel patterning
control. Our model systems include a mix of regenerative non-mammalian models (in
which to learn about the rich endogenous mechanisms) and mammalian tissue culture
applications which are important to maintain continuous relevance to eventual
biomedical endpoints as well as to serve as test-beds for validating novel concepts from
the ground up. Because this project is necessarily “compass-driven” (it's a frontier area
and the major discoveries cannot yet be predicted), our goal is to perform work in the
first year to help identify the most promising areas and help shape the emphasis of
subsequent years. A nimble directionality will be used to set priorities in all years, but it
is important to note that especially in the beginning we will explore several promising
directions and then will narrow down to the ones whose data suggests them to be the
most likely to be impactful and rewarding (not try to pursue everything at once).

Our plan has 2 global components, addressed via a highly interdisciplinary
combination of new theory, device development, and focused experiments. We will 1)
answer several fundamental questions for the first time, and 2) enable new capabilities
for pattern control. Our process is meant to be iterative feedback between the
development of new theory, instrumentation, and specific results. The first year will be
largely mechanistic investigations and platform development. But by year 2, we will
begin testing models and immediately performing key experiments in pattern control
that will allow us to revise the models, alter apparatus/protocols if needed, and identify
new but important unknowns to be addressed. Our deliverables will not only facilitate
this Center's effort, but be widely enabling technologies for others, multiplying the
impact on many subfields. Our second goal is to use these new tools and conceptual
apparatus to answer key questions and generate new basic knowledge that alters
prevailing paradigms in this area, and rewrites fundamental assumptions present in
textbooks in the field. In the second phase, we plan to continue developing new
knowledge in areas identified in phase 1, and to begin to transition the new knowledge
into proof-of-principle applications targeted towards regenerative medicine and
engineering.


[PAGE 12] Some fundamental scientific details
One unique aspect in our work is that we will address bioelectric signaling: the
ways in which networks of all cells (not just excitable nerve and muscle) use gradients
of resting potential to regulate morphogenesis. Our lab and other groups using our
technology have begun to show bioelectrical control of stem cell function, organ size,
tumor normalization, craniofacial and brain patterning, induction of limb regeneration in
non-regenerative settings, and production of complete eyes, limbs, and other organs
from other types of somatic tissue in vivo [79, 81, 83, 97-99]. It is now abundantly clear
that modulating bioelectric gradients can induce rational, coordinated changes in large-
scale anatomy; it is extremely efficient in exerting top-down control over shape, and
coordinates numerous downstream steps that would be too difficult to micromanage
directly. It is an ideal modality for exploiting developmental modularity to activate
morphogenetic "subroutines". What is not known is how cellular networks can represent
target morphologies and enable the step-wise, iterative computations by which bodies
determine what's missing and coordinate cell-level instructions toward large-scale goals.

Elucidating the large-scale representation of somatic pattern by bioelectric states
is a key next challenge in this field and our plan includes a concerted attack on this
fundamental problem. Our work will not focus exclusively on bioelectricity – clearly, the
complete answer will require the integration of bioelectrical signaling with biochemical
gradients, gene-regulatory networks, and physical forces, because these other
properties are used by cells during morphogenetic processing. However, bioelectric
signaling is an essential, novel element in cracking this puzzle, because a significant
part of the morphogenetic code is encoded in bioelectric properties and because it
seems to offer control over coherent modules, not only cell-level details.

Cells communicate using a variety of modalities, including secreted chemicals
and pressure/tensile forces. However, bioelectricity is special. It is not an accident that
evolution has chosen bioelectricity as the modality that underlies information processing
in the brain. It is likewise not an accident that our information technology relies on
electricity for computation. Electrical dynamics are ideally suited for computation -
precisely what is needed for cells to continuously regulate after unpredictable injury and
perturbation. Also, bioelectrical signaling is uniquely suited for integrating long-range
signaling, which is required in order to coordinate individual cell behaviors across the
whole organism (like the remodeling that ensures that embryonic organs and
regenerating structures grow in perfect proportion with other regions of the body). The
fundamental unit of computation, the logic gate, is easily constructed of transistor-like
elements, which - both in the brain and in the body - is made of gap junctions: channels
between cells that regulate current flow based on local voltage. Modulation of gap
junction-based somatic networks is a key aspect of developmental bioelectricity,
because this is an untapped entry-point into how cell networks represent patterning
information.

The striking data showing that rewriting the bioelectric circuit dynamics leads
directly to the reprogramming of shape in vivo suggest a new metaphor for
understanding morphogenesis. The current textbooks say that the DNA is the software
while the cell is the hardware that interprets it. We believe this metaphor needs to be
revised to encompass the true circularity of the process: the DNA determines the
hardware (by encoding the specific gap junction and ion channel proteins that can
support electrical dynamics in cell networks), while the resulting bioelectric circuits have
their own dynamics that regulate gene expression, which in turn may affect the number
and type of channels, in a continuous interplay between genetics and physiology. The
hardware is important, in that it limits what can happen. But it does not fully determine
the outcome - the morphogenetic outcome is in large part the result of bioelectric


[PAGE 13] software - circuit dynamics that run on the cellular ion channel hardware (very much like
what happens in the brain, where cognitive content and specific memories derive from
the bioelectric software, not the genome directly). Learning to manipulate the bioelectric
software running on somatic cell networks is the key to top-down programming of
morphogenesis.


[PAGE 13] Conclusion

The Allen