[PAGE 1] METHODS AND COMPOSITIONS FOR
MODULATING MEMBRANE POTENTIAL TO
INFLUENCE CELL BEHAVIOR

ABSTRACT
The present invention provides methods for controlling proliferation, differentiation, and/or migration of cells by modulating membrane potential through an endogenously expressed channel protein. The present invention also provides methods for identifying candidate instructor cells, as well as therapeutic agents that are useful for modulating (e.g., promote or inhibit) proliferation and differentiation, as well as promoting regeneration of a desired tissue type.

[PAGE 2] METHODS AND COMPOSITIONS FOR
MODULATING MEMBRANE POTENTIAL TO
INFLUENCE CELL BEHAVIOR

RELATED APPLICATIONS

[0001] This application claims the benefit of priority to U.S. provisional application No. 61/227,708, filed Jul. 22, 2009, the disclosure of which is hereby incorporated by reference in its entirety.

BACKGROUND OF THE INVENTION

[0002] The regeneration of complex tissues and organ systems lost to injury, senescence, or disease is a key goal of biomedicine. In addition to its clinical applications, the regeneration of organs is fascinating because it represents one of the most fundamental properties of most living things: recognition of damage and self-repair. The process of regeneration, embryonic development and neoplasm undoubtedly result from a complex orchestration of growth and morphogenesis. Currently, substantial efforts are being invested in academia and industry to understand the fundamental principles influencing differentiation and regeneration so that the powers of these processes can be harnessed and used to treat degenerative diseases and injuries.

SUMMARY OF THE INVENTION

[0003] The present invention provides methods for controlling proliferation, differentiation, and/or migration of cells by modulating membrane potential.

[PAGE 3] [0004] In one aspect, the invention provides a method of promoting tissue regeneration, comprising contacting an effective amount of a macrocyclic lactone to a cell culture, wherein the macrocyclic lactone alters the membrane potential of said cells through an endogenous ligand-gated channel expressed in said cell, thereby promoting tissue regeneration. For example, the macrocyclic lactone may be added to the cell culture media so as to act on the cells. In certain embodiments, promoting tissue regeneration comprises promoting one or more of proliferation, differentiation, migration, or survival.


[PAGE 4] [0028] In certain aspects, the invention provides a method for identifying an instructor cell capable of modulating proliferation, differentiation, and/or migration, comprising: i) identifying one or more ligand-gated channels endogenously expressed by a discrete population of candidate instructor cells, ii) administering an effective amount of an agent to alter membrane potential of the candidate instructor cell through the identified ligand-gated channel, and iii) assaying for the presence or absence of a desired phenotype, whereby the presence or absence of a desired phenotype indicates that the candidate instructor cell is an instructor cell capable of modulating proliferation, differentiation, and/or migration of one or more other cells.

In some embodiments, the subject cell is a cancer cell, e.g., melanoma cell. In other embodiments, the subject cell is a neural crest derivative, e.g., melanocytes or melanocyte precursor.

In other embodiments, any of the foregoing methods promote proliferation, differentiation, and/or migration of the subject cell. In certain embodiments, any of the foregoing methods inhibit proliferation, differentiation, and/or migration of the subject cell. In other related embodiments, any of the foregoing methods may inhibit migration of the subject cell.

[PAGE 4] In another aspect, the invention provides a method of promoting tissue regeneration, comprising administering an effective amount of an agent to alter the membrane potential of an instructor cell, which instructor cell endogenously expresses a GlyCl chloride channel, wherein said agent alters the membrane potential of the instructor cell through said endogenously expressed GlyCl channel, thereby promoting tissue regeneration.

In a related embodiment, the method may further comprise decreasing the extracellular chloride concentration relative to that in the instructor cell to promote efflux of chloride ions from the instructor cell, thereby altering the membrane potential of the instructor cell. In other embodiments, the method may further comprise increasing the extracellular chloride concentration relative to that in the instructor cell to promote influx of chloride ions to the instructor cell, thereby altering the membrane potential of the instructor cell. In either embodiment, the instructor cell may become depolarized or hyperpolarized. In some embodiments, the method comprises administering the agent to a culture comprising the instructor cell.

In certain embodiments, the agent is a macrocyclic lactone selected from the group: avermectin, ivermectin, eprinomectin, abamectin, or moxidectin. In other embodiments, the agent is a nucleic acid or a small molecule.

In certain embodiments, any of the foregoing methods promotes proliferation, differentiation, and/or migration of a progenitor cell. In other embodiments, the method inhibits migration of a progenitor cell.

The invention contemplates combinations of any of the foregoing or following aspects and embodiments of the invention.

[PAGE 4] BRIEF DESCRIPTION OF THE DRAWINGS

[PAGE 5] DETAILED DESCRIPTION OF THE INVENTION
I. Overview

[PAGE 5] Much of regenerative medicine is focused on stem cells (Chen et al., 2008; Cuenca-Lopez et al., 2008). Most applications currently focus on biochemical factors in the external medium and expression of transgenes to control differentiation and proliferation of stem cells (Dan and Ben-venisty, 2006; Ingber and Levin, 2007). Recently, techniques using bioelectrical signals have been developed and applied (Adams and Levin, 2006a, 2006b; Levin, 2007) to modulate stem cell behavior. In particular, the ability to control proliferation, migration, and differentiation in human mesenchymal stem cells and tadpole neural crest derivatives have been shown (Morokuma et al., 2008a; Oviedo and Levin, 2007; Sundelacruz et al., 2008). In a number of cases, bioelectrical control of large-scale patterning phenomena highly relevant to the induction of regeneration of whole organs or appendages has been demonstrated (Adams et al., 2007; Levin et al., 2002; Nogi and Levin, 2005).

The present invention provides, in part, a novel technique for the bioelectrical modulation of cells without requiring expression of heterologous transporter proteins. Instead, ion channels/pumps already expressed in the cells are used. The endogenous channels can be opened or closed using, for example, a small molecule, and its ion flux can be controlled by modulating the extracellular milieu. As exemplified herein, the drug ivermectin (approved for human and veterinary use as an anti-parasitic agent) may be used to open the glycine-gated chloride (GlyCl) channel. Once open, the extracellular chloride concentration can be decreased to depolarize the transmembrane potential of the cells (negative chloride ions leave through this channel, down the concentration gradient). Alternatively, the extracellular chloride concentration can be increased to hyperpolarize the membrane voltage of the cells (negative chloride ions will enter the cell through this channel, down the concentration gradient). Similarly, the extracellular chloride concentration can be appropriately altered to repolarize (i.e., revert back to resting state) the membrane voltage of cells that are abnormally depolarized or hyperpolarized. Thus, by opening an endogenously expressed channel using an agent, e.g., a small molecule, and then modulating the extracellular environment appropriately, the membrane potential of cells can be controlled in vitro or in vivo in a time-dependent manner to control any one or more of proliferation, differentiation, migration, neural outgrowth, and appendage regeneration. Similarly, as shown herein, the endogenous ion channel can be closed using a second small molecule, for example strychnine, to modulate the membrane potential and cell behavior.


[PAGE 6] The novel techniques described herein can be used to modulate membrane potential and cell behavior by (a) modulating the membrane potential of an instructor cell such that the instructor cell can influence a responder cell (the "subject cell") and/or (b) modulating the membrane potential of a stem cell (the "subject cell") which can itself proliferate, differentiate, and/or migrate as a consequence of the change in membrane potential. In some embodiments, membrane potential modulation of the instructor cell and/or the stem cell may be fine-tuned to promote or inhibit proliferation, differentiation and/or migration of a subject cell. For example, as described herein, depolarizing an instructor cell or a stem cell promotes proliferation, differentiation and/or migration of a subject cell. Such an effect may be desirable in tissue generation/regeneration, where proliferation of a tissue type or differentiation of a precursor cell into a desired tissue type is sought. In certain embodiments, however, the constitutively depolarized state of an instructor or stem cell may lead to overproliferation, contributing to a cancer-like state. Accordingly, in such instances, it is desirable to repolarize or restore (i.e., revert back to resting state), or hyperpolarize the depolarized state of an instructor or stem cell to inhibit proliferation.

In a related embodiment, disclosed herein is a novel approach by which cells can be stimulated to proliferate, differentiate, and/or migrate (for example, to generate or regenerate) into a desired tissue type. Specifically, the present invention relates, in part, to the discovery that a population of cells, termed "instructor cells", play a role in tissue generation and/or regeneration by "instructing" cells non-cell-autonomously. The instructor cells may influence the development of cells directly, or indirectly, e.g., by influencing a signaling cascade. Without being bound by theory, each population of instructor cells is identifiable by endogenous expression of one or more ion channel proteins. Modulation of ion flux and membrane potential of the instructor cell via that channel protein triggers the instructor cell to modulate, directly or indirectly, proliferation, differentiation, and/or migration of other cells, i.e., subject cells (e.g., responder cells). The cells influenced by a given instructor cell population may, in certain embodiments, be located at a distance from the instructor cells. In a related embodiment, membrane potential of progenitor cells can be directly modulated to influence the behavior of the stem cells. In another related embodiment, the present disclosure provides a novel approach by which proliferation, differentiation and/or migration can be inhibited.

[PAGE 6] In certain aspects, the present invention also provides a method for identifying candidate therapeutic agents that are useful for proliferating, differentiating, and regenerating any tissue type desired.
The present invention has numerous utilities. For example, the present invention provides unique markers (e.g., GlyCl) of a population of instructor cells. Further, the present invention provides methods for promoting proliferation, differentiation, and/or survival of cells, including progenitor cells. Additionally, the present invention provides methods for inhibiting proliferation, differentiation, and/or survival of cells. Such methods may be used in vitro or in vivo to modulate cell behavior and/or promote tissue generation or regeneration. Alternatively, the present methods may be used to inhibit tissue generation/proliferation (i.e., anti-tumor methods), thereby providing a novel mechanism by which bioelectrical properties of the microenvironment mediate the stem cell-cancer cell transition. Further, the present invention provides methods for identifying other populations of instructor cells that can be used to influence the behavior of other cell types.

[PAGE 6] II. Definitions

[PAGE 7] III. Detailed Description of Illustrative Embodiments

[PAGE 7] A. Methods of Identifying Instructor Cells

"instructor cells", can direct the proliferation, differentiation, and/or migration, and ultimately the fate, of neighboring and/or distant cells. Without being bound by theory, the cells upon which a given instructor cell acts may be progenitor cells or partially or terminally differentiated cells. As exemplified herein (Example 1), we have identified an example of an instructor cell population capable of influencing melanocyte (a neural crest derivative), as well as neuroectodermal fate. This discrete instructor cell population expresses the glycine-gated chloride (GlyCl) channel. Briefly, one arm of the results showed that when Xenopus embryos from gastrulation throughout development were treated with ivermectin, a compound known to activate the GlyCl channel, 98% of the treated larvae developed a striking hyperpigmentation. Further, the melanocytes in treated individuals exhibited a dendritic morphology and often migrated to regions normally devoid of pigment cells, such as the lateral eye field and base of the tail. In the second arm of the study (Example 1B), the embryonic source of the hyperpigmentation signal was sought. That is, the expression pattern of GlyCl was observed throughout various stages of embryonic development. This revealed that, since numerous cells in the embryo express the target receptor, the effect of ivermectin is unlikely to be only directly on the melanocytes themselves, and supports the conclusion that ivermectin likely acts on a population of cells described herein as instructor cells. Without being bound by theory, the instructor cells non-cell-autonomously induce certain cells to differentiate and/or migrate, and otherwise determine the fate of a cell in the process of generating melanocytes.

[PAGE 8] Accordingly, one aspect of the invention provides a method of identifying a population of instructor cells that modulate (i.e., promote or inhibit) proliferation, differentiation, and/or migration of a cell, comprising contacting a sample with an agent that detects expression of a GlyCl channel, wherein cells in the sample that express the GlyCl channel are identified as instructor cells that modulate proliferation, differentiation, and/or migration of a cell, such as a melanocyte, a melanocyte precursor, a neural crest derivative cell, a neural precursor, a neural derivative cell, or a neuroectodermal cell. An instructor cell may be a particular population of stem cells, or a population of cells more differentiated than a stem cell. For example, an instructor cell may be a neural crest derivative, mesenchymal stem cell, or a melanocyte. Similarly, a cell that is acted upon by an instructor cell, either directly or indirectly, may also be any number of stem cells, or a population of cells more differentiated than a stem cell, as defined herein.

It should also be understood that, as described herein, channel proteins other than GlyCl may serve as markers for other instructor cells. For example, other markers include channel proteins that transport the following ion species: K, Na, Ca, H, Cl, Zn, Cu, Fe, OH, HCO3. Different instructor cell populations likely function to influence the proliferation, differentiation, and/or migration of distinct responder cell populations. Thus, identifying a range of instructor cell populations provides a mechanism for modulating behavior of a range of responder cell populations.

The experiments described herein summarize the identification of a population of instructor cells that expressed a GlyCl channel. This population of instructor cells acts with great specificity to influence proliferation, differentiation, and migration of melanocytes and/or melanocyte precursors. Without being bound by theory, it is contemplated that other instructor cell populations capable of modulating cell behavior of other cell types (e.g., cell types that contribute to other tissues) will be characterized and identifiable based on a unique pattern of endogenous expression of one or more ion channels.

In a related embodiment, an agent that detects a marker channel may be one that detects the marker protein or marker mRNA. Some examples of such agents include, for example, antibodies or nucleic acid probes that bind to the marker protein or hybridize to a nucleic acid encoding the marker protein, respectively. For example, and as exemplified herein, antibodies or nucleic acid probes that detect, specifically, the GlyCl channel may be used. Reagents and methods for detection of protein or mRNA in a sample are well known in the art.

In certain aspects of the invention, also provided herein is a method for identifying an instructor cell capable of modulating proliferation, differentiation, and/or migration of a progenitor cell, comprising: i) identifying one or more ligand-gated channels endogenously expressed by a discrete population of candidate instructor cells, ii) administering an effective amount of an agent to alter membrane potential of the candidate instructor cell through the identified ligand-gated channel, and iii) assaying for the presence or absence of a desired phenotype, whereby the presence or absence of a desired phenotype indicates that the candidate instructor cell is an instructor cell capable of modulating proliferation, differentiation, and/or migration of one or more responder cells.

In this approach, the user may screen for the expression of a channel protein of choice from a panel of channel proteins known in the art (e.g., GlyCl, H+-V-ATPase, K-ATP channel, Na/Ca exchanger, etc., known in the art) using, e.g., in situ hybridization, or any method known in the art. By doing so, one or more population of candidate instructor cells that each constitute a discrete pattern of expression for a given channel protein may then be selected for further analysis. Since the identity of the endogenous channel protein for each candidate instructor cell is known, the appropriate agent that modulates (opens or closes) the particular channel protein can be administered to screen for any number of desired phenotypic traits. By way of example, as demonstrated in Example 1B of the present invention, hyperpigmentation and proliferation of melanocytes (a neural crest derivative) in an embryo may be assessed.

[PAGE 9] Accordingly, the present method allows for the identification of candidate therapeutic agents that may be used to promote or inhibit proliferation, differentiation, and regeneration of any number of tissue type desired. Further, and as reflected in the Examples and described herein, the identified instructor cells influence responder cells with a high level of specificity. For example, modulating membrane potential via an endogenously expressed GlyCl channel resulted in a pronounced effect on melanocytes, without observable effects on other neural crest derivatives. Thus, the approach and methods provided herein allows manipulation of cells and tissues with a high level of specificity by harnessing endogenous channel expression and instructor cell activity. These principles of instructor cells are applicable to other aspects of modulating membrane potential of instructor cells described throughout the application.

[PAGE 9] B. Methods of Modulating Proliferation, Differentiation, and/or Migration
(i) Altering the Membrane Potential of Instructor Cells to Control Cell Behavior

In certain aspects, the disclosure provides a method of promoting tissue regeneration by administering an effective amount of an agent to alter the membrane potential of an instructor cell, which instructor cell endogenously expresses a GlyCl chloride channel, wherein said agent alters the membrane potential of the instructor cell through said endogenously expressed GlyCl channel, thereby promoting tissue regeneration.  In certain embodiments, promoting tissue regeneration comprises promoting one or more of proliferation, differentiation, migration, or survival.  In some embodiments, the method comprises administering the agent to a culture comprising the instructor cell.

In a related embodiment, the method may further comprise decreasing the extracellular chloride concentration relative to that in the instructor cell to promote efflux of chloride ions from the instructor cell, thereby altering the membrane potential of the instructor cell. In other embodiments, the method may further comprise increasing the extracellular chloride concentration relative to that in the instructor cell to promote influx of chloride ions to the instructor cell, thereby altering the membrane potential of the instructor cell. In either embodiment, the instructor cell may become depolarized or hyperpolarized.

(ii) Altering the Membrane Potential of Progenitor Cells to Control Cell Behavior

[PAGE 9] In another aspect, the invention provides a method of promoting tissue regeneration, comprising contacting an effective amount of a macrocyclic lactone to a cell culture, wherein the macrocyclic lactone alters the membrane potential of said cells through an endogenous ligand-gated channel expressed in said cell, thereby promoting tissue regeneration.  In certain embodiments, promoting tissue regeneration comprises promoting one or more of proliferation, differentiation, migration, or survival.  In some embodiments, the cell culture comprises a progenitor cell, such as a neural crest progenitor cell, a mesenchymal stem cell (e.g., a human mesenchymal stem cell), a neural stem cell, a neuroectodermal stem cell, or an embryonic stem cell.  In certain embodiments, the macrocyclic lactone is selected from the group consisting of: avermectin, ivermectin, eprinomectin, abamectin, or moxidectin.  The method may further comprise decreasing or increasing the extracellular chloride concentration relative to that in the progenitor cell to promote efflux or influx of chloride ions, respectively, thereby altering the membrane potential of the progenitor cell.  In certain embodiments, the ligand-gated channel is a chloride channel.

[PAGE 9] C. Compounds for Use in the Subject Methods

[PAGE 9] (i) Macrocyclic Lactones

[PAGE 9] In certain embodiments, the agent is a macrocyclic lactone selected from the group consisting of: avermectin, ivermectin, eprinomectin, abamectin, or moxidectin.

[PAGE 9] (ii) Nucleic Acids

[PAGE 12] In other embodiments, the compound is a nucleic acid, such as an antisense oligonucleotide or an RNAi construct. Antisense oligonucleotides and ribozymes inhibit the expression of a protein, e.g., by inhibiting transcription and/or translation. Binding of the oligonucleotide or ribozyme to the nucleic acid encoding the particular channel protein for which inactivation is desired may be by conventional base pair complementarity, or, for example, in the case of binding to DNA duplexes, through specific interactions in the major groove of the double helix.  An antisense construct of the present invention can be delivered, for example, as an expression plasmid which, when transcribed in the cell, produces RNA which is complementary to at least a unique portion of the cellular mRNA which encodes a particular protein. Alternatively, the antisense construct is an oligonucleotide probe that is generated ex vivo and which, when introduced into the cell causes inhibition of expression by hybridizing with the mRNA and/or genomic sequences encoding a particular channel protein. Such oligonucleotide probes are preferably modified oligonucleotides that are resistant to endogenous nucleases, e.g., exonucleases and/or endonucleases, and are therefore stable in vivo. Exemplary nucleic acid molecules for use as antisense oligonucleotides are phosphoramidate, phosphothioate and methylphosphonate analogs of DNA (see also U.S. Pat. Nos. 5,176,996; 5,264,564; and 5,256,775). The antisense oligonucleotide may comprise at least one modified base moiety known in the art. The antisense oligonucleotide may also comprise at least one modified sugar moiety selected from the group including, but not limited to, arabinose, 2-fluoroarabinose, xylulose, and hexose. The antisense oligonucleotide can also contain a neutral peptide-like backbone. Such molecules are termed peptide nucleic acid (PNA)-oligomers and are described, e.g., in Perry-O'Keefe et al. (1996) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 93:14670 and in Eglom et al. (1993) Nature 365:566. In yet a further embodiment, the antisense oligonucleotide is an-anomeric oligonucleotide. An-anomeric oligonucleotide forms specific double-stranded hybrids with complementary RNA in which, contrary to the usual-units, the strands run parallel to each other (Gautier et al., 1987, Nucl. Acids Res. 15:6625-6641). The oligonucleotide is a 2'-0-methylribonucleotide (Inoue et al., 1987, Nucl. Acids Res. 15:6131-6148), or a chimeric RNA-DNA analogue (Inoue et al., 1987, FEBS Lett. 215:327-330). Oligonucleotides to be used in the present invention may be synthesized by standard methods known in the art, e.g., by use of an automated DNA synthesizer (such as are commercially available from Biosearch, Applied Biosystems, etc.). As examples, phosphorothioate oligonucleotides may be synthesized by the method of Stein et al. (1988, Nucl. Acids Res. 16:3209), methylphosphonate oligonucleotides can be prepared by use of controlled pore glass polymer supports (Sarin et al., 1988, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 85:7448-7451). The antisense molecules can be delivered to cells or animals in vitro or in vivo. A number of methods have been developed for delivering antisense DNA or RNA to cells; e.g., antisense molecules can be injected directly into the tissue site, or modified antisense molecules, designed to target the desired cells (e.g., antisense linked to peptides or antibodies that specifically bind receptors or antigens expressed on the target cell surface) can be administered systemically. These and other methods are have been used to deliver single antisense oligonucleotides, as well as libraries of oligonucleotides. Any type of plasmid, cosmid, YAC or viral vector can be used to prepare the recombinant DNA construct that can be introduced directly into the tissue site. Alternatively, viral vectors can be used which selectively infect the desired tissue, in which case administration may be accomplished by another route (e.g., systematically). Ribozyme molecules designed to catalytically cleave an mRNA transcript can also be used to prevent translation of mRNA (See, e.g., PCT International Publication WO90/11364, published Oct. 4, 1990; Sarver et al., 1990, Science 247:1222-1225 and U.S. Pat. No. 5,093,246), and is well known in the art. As in the antisense approach, the ribozymes can be composed of modified oligonucleotides (e.g., for improved stability, targeting, etc.) and can be delivered in vivo or in vitro. Alternatively, endogenous gene expression can be reduced by targeting deoxyribonucleotide sequences complementary to the regulatory region of the gene (i.e., the promoter and/or enhancers) to form triple helical structures that prevent transcription of the gene in target cells in the body. (See generally, Helene, C. 1991, Anticancer Drug Des., 6(6):569-84; Helene, C., et al., 1992, Ann. N.Y. Acad. Sci., 660:27-36; and Maher, L. J., 1992, Bioassays 14(12):807-15). Antisense RNA and DNA, ribozyme, and triple helix molecules to be used in the invention may be prepared by any method known in the art for the synthesis of DNA and RNA molecules. These include techniques for chemically synthesizing oligodeoxyribonucleotides and oligoribonucleotides well known in the art such as for example solid phase phosphoramidite chemical synthesis. Alternatively, RNA molecules may be generated by in vitro and in vivo transcription of DNA sequences encoding the antisense RNA molecule. Moreover, various well-known modifications to nucleic acid molecules may be introduced as a means of increasing intracellular stability and half-life. Possible modifications include but are not limited to the addition of flanking sequences of ribonucleotides or deoxyribonucleotides to the 5' and/or 3' ends of the molecule or the use of phosphorothioate or 2'O-methyl rather than phosphodiesterase linkages within the oligodeoxyribonucleotide backbone.

[PAGE 12] (ii) RNAi

[PAGE 12] In other embodiments, the compound is an RNAi construct. RNAi constructs comprise double stranded RNA that can specifically block expression of a target gene. "RNA interference" or "RNAi" is a term initially applied to a phenomenon observed in plants and worms where double-stranded RNA (dsRNA) blocks gene expression in a specific and post-transcriptional manner. Without being bound by theory, RNAi appears to involve mRNA degradation, however the biochemical mechanisms are currently an active area of research. RNAi provides a useful method of inhibiting gene expression in vitro or in vivo. As used herein, the term "dsRNA" refers to siRNA molecules, or other RNA molecules including a double stranded feature and able to be processed to siRNA in cells, such as hairpin RNA moieties, as specifically exemplified herein.  As used herein, the term "RNAi construct" is a generic term used throughout the specification to include small interfering RNAs (siRNAs), hairpin RNAs, and other RNA species which can be cleaved in vivo to form siRNAs. RNAi constructs herein also include expression vectors (also referred to as RNAi expression vectors) capable of giving rise to transcripts which form dsRNAs or hairpin RNAs in cells, and/or transcripts which can produce siRNAs in vivo. Production of RNAi constructs to be used in the present invention can be carried out by chemical synthetic methods or by recombinant nucleic acid techniques known in the art. Endogenous RNA polymerase of the treated cell may mediate transcription in vivo, or cloned RNA polymerase can be used for transcription in vitro. The RNAi constructs may include modifications to either the phosphate-sugar backbone or the nucleoside, e.g., to reduce susceptibility to cellular nucleases, improve bioavailability, improve formulation characteristics, and/or change other pharmacokinetic properties. The double-stranded structure may be formed by a single self-complementary RNA strand or two complementary RNA strands. RNA duplex formation may be initiated either inside or outside the cell. The RNA may be introduced in an amount which allows delivery of at least one copy per cell. Higher doses (e.g., at least 5, 10, 100, 500 or 1000 copies per cell) of double-stranded material may yield more effective inhibition, while lower doses may also be useful for specific applications. Inhibition is sequence-specific in that nucleotide sequences corresponding to the duplex region of the RNA are targeted for genetic inhibition. The siRNA molecules to be used in the present invention can be obtained using a number of techniques known to those of skill in the art. For example, the siRNA can be chemically synthesized or recombinantly produced using methods known in the art. For example, short sense and antisense RNA oligomers can be synthesized and annealed to form double-stranded RNA structures with 2-nucleotide overhangs at each end (Caplen, et al. (2001) Proc Natl Acad Sci USA, 98:9742-9747; Elbashir, et al. (2001) EMBO J, 20:6877-88). These double-stranded siRNA structures can then be directly introduced to cells, either by passive uptake or a delivery system of choice. In certain embodiments, the RNAi construct is in the form of a hairpin structure (named as hairpin RNA). The hairpin RNAs can be synthesized exogenously or can be formed by transcribing from RNA polymerase III promoters in vivo. Examples of making and using such hairpin RNAs for gene silencing in mammalian cells are described in, for example, Paddison et al., Genes Dev, 2002, 16:948-58; McCaffrey et al., Nature, 2002, 418:38-9; McManus et al., RNA, 2002, 8:842-50; Yu et al., Proc Natl Acad Sci USA, 2002, 99:6047-52). It is known in the art that siRNAs can be produced by processing a hairpin RNA in the cell. In yet other embodiments, a plasmid is used to deliver the double-stranded RNA, e.g., as a transcriptional product. In such embodiments, the plasmid is designed to include a "coding sequence" for each of the sense and antisense strands of the RNAi construct. The coding sequences can be the same sequence, e.g., flanked by inverted promoters, or can be two separate sequences each under transcriptional control of separate promoters. After the coding sequence is transcribed, the complementary RNA transcripts base-pair to form the double-stranded RNA. Exemplary RNAi constructs that specifically recognize a particular gene, or a particular family of genes can be selected using methodology outlined in detail above with respect to the selection of antisense oligonucleotide. Similarly, methods of delivering RNAi constructs include the methods for delivering antisense oligonucleotides outlined in detail above, and as exemplified herein.

[PAGE 13] V. Cells and Animals

[PAGE 13] As outlined throughout in reference to particular methods of the invention, the subject methods can be conducted in vivo or in vitro in cells derived from or resident in virtually any organism. The foregoing methods can be conducted in cells in culture, in tissue samples maintained ex vivo, or in animals. When the method is conducted using cells in culture, the invention contemplates using cells derived from any organism, tissue, or stage of development. Furthermore, the invention contemplates that the cells may be primary cultures of cells, or transformed cell lines, and that the cells can either be wild type cells or cells containing one or more mutations. Mutant cells or cell lines may be models of a particular disease or injury, or may be derived from animals having a specific disease or injury (e.g. cancer cells harvested from an animal). Cells may be derived from (e.g., derived from and cultured in vitro as populations of cells or tissues) or reside in (cells resident in a whole animal or portion of a whole animal) any of a number of animal species. Exemplary animals include, but are not limited to, flatworms, amphibians, fish, reptiles, birds, or mammals. Suitable flatworms include planarian. Suitable amphibians include Xenopus laevis, Xenopus tropicalis, and other species of frog. Suitable birds include chickens, as well as other birds commonly used or maintained in a laboratory setting. Suitable mammals include mice, rats, hamsters, goats, sheep, pigs, cows, dogs, cats, rabbits, non-human primates, and humans. Regardless of the species of cells or animal selected, the invention contemplates that cells may be derived from or reside in an animal of virtually any stage of development. For example, the cells may be derived from or reside in an embryonic, larval, fetal, juvenile, or adult organism. To further illustrate, in one embodiment, the foregoing methods may be conducted using cells derived from or resident in a nematode. There are over 10,000 known nematode species. These include parasitic nematodes (e.g., nematodes that are parasitic to humans, non-human animals, or plants). Exemplary parasitic nematodes include, but are not limited to, whipworms, Ascaris, hookworms, filarial worms, and root knot nematodes. C. elegans is perhaps the most well known and thoroughly studied nematode, and the invention contemplates using C. elegans or other nematodes. In another embodiment, the foregoing methods may be conducted in cells derived from or resident in a fish or amphibian species. Zebrafish (e.g., adult zebrafish and developing, e.g., embryonic fish) are a particular example of a fish well suited for study. Zebrafish are an extensively used developmental system, and genetic, cell biological, and molecular biological reagents and methods are well known and available. Additionally, numerous chemical and radiation-based screens have produced large numbers of mutant zebrafish that can also be used for study.

[PAGE 14] Xenopus laevis and Xenopus tropicalis (e.g., adult, embryonic, tadpole, etc. stage animals) are particular examples of amphibians well suited for study. Both species are used extensively, and well developed reagents exist. For example, the availability of these molecular reagents facilitates assays based on changes in gene or protein expression, either instead of or in addition to assays based on morphological criteria. Additionally, Xenopus tropicalis is a genetically tractable model organism, and mutants have been and continue to be generated and characterized. Xenopus cells and whole organisms are excellent systems for screening assays. The cells of early Xenopus embryos are relatively large, and thus easily manipulated, injected, and used for electrophysiological recording. Eggs and embryos can be collected in very large numbers. This facilitates biochemical, pharmacological, and statistical analyses. In another embodiment, the foregoing methods may be conducted in cells derived from or resident in a flatworm. Exemplary flatworms are the free-living (e.g., non-parasitic) flatworm planaria. Planaria are in the phylum Platylhelmenthes and the class Turbellaria. There are numerous species of planaria, any of which can be readily used. Planaria exhibit much of the complexity of vertebrate systems: a well-differentiated nervous system, intestine, eyes, brain, three tissue layers, and bilateral symmetry. Planaria represent a critical breakthrough in the evolution of the animal body plan and are thought to very closely resemble the proto-bilaterian ancestor. It is the first organism to have both bilateral symmetry and encephalization, making it capable of detecting environmental stimuli quicker and more efficiently than the lower metazoans. Despite a simplistic appearance and evolutionary position, planaria possess a well-developed nervous system with true synaptic transmission and have what can be considered the first animal "brain" (Sarnat and Netsky (1985) Can J Neurol Sci. 12(4): 296-302). They have also developed sensory capabilities for the detection of light (Brown and Park (1975) Int J. Chronobiol. 3(1):57-62; Brown et al., 1968), chemical gradients (Mason (1975) Anim Behay. May; 23(2): 460-9; Miyamoto and Shimozawa (1985) Zoological Science (Tokyo) 2: 389-396), vibration (Fulgheri and Messeri (1973) Boll Soc Ital Biol Sper. 49(20): 1141-5), electric fields (Brown and Ogden (1968) J Gen Physiol. 51 (2)255-60), magnetic fields (Brown and Chow (1975) Physiological Zoology 48: 168-176; Brown (1966) Nature 209: 533-5), and weak y-radiation (Brown and Park (1964) Nature 202: 469-471). Planaria have exceptional regenerative capacity. A bisected flatworm readily regenerates. Thus planaria, either whole animals or fragments, serve as an excellent model system in which to study the implications of ion flux on cell proliferation, differentiation, and migration, as well as on instructor cell identification