CORRIGENDUM
Development 139, 623 (2012) doi:10.1242/dev.077917
© 2012. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd

Transmembrane voltage potential controls embryonic eye patterning in Xenopus laevis
Vaibhav P. Pai, Sherry Aw, Tal Shomrat, Joan M. Lemire and Michael Levin

There was an error in the version of Development 139, 313-323 published on ePress on December 7th 2011.
The first two authors should have been listed as having contributed equally to this work. The print and final online versions are correct.
The authors apologise to readers for this mistake.


[PAGE 2] RESEARCH ARTICLE

Transmembrane voltage potential controls embryonic eye
patterning in Xenopus laevis
Vaibhav P. Pai*, Sherry Aw*´§, Tal Shomrat, Joan M. Lemire and Michael Levin*

SUMMARY
Uncovering the molecular mechanisms of eye development is crucial for understanding the embryonic morphogenesis of complex
structures, as well as for the establishment of novel biomedical approaches to address birth defects and injuries of the visual
system. Here, we characterize change in transmembrane voltage potential (Vmem) as a novel biophysical signal for eye induction
in Xenopus laevis. During normal embryogenesis, a striking hyperpolarization demarcates a specific cluster of cells in the anterior
neural field. Depolarizing the dorsal lineages in which these cells reside results in malformed eyes. Manipulating Vmem of non-eye
cells induces well-formed ectopic eyes that are morphologically and histologically similar to endogenous eyes. Remarkably, such
ectopic eyes can be induced far outside the anterior neural field. A Ca2+ channel-dependent pathway transduces the Vmem signal
and regulates patterning of eye field transcription factors. These data reveal a new, instructive role for membrane voltage during
embryogenesis and demonstrate that Vmem is a crucial upstream signal in eye development. Learning to control bioelectric
initiators of organogenesis offers significant insight into birth defects that affect the eye and might have significant implications
for regenerative approaches to ocular diseases.

KEY WORDS: Membrane potential, Eyes, Bioelectricity, Xenopus

[PAGE 2] INTRODUCTION
Embryonic eye development offers the opportunity to understand
the genetic and biophysical mechanisms that drive the self-
assembly of complex biological structures (Erclik et al., 2009). Eye
tissue formation begins with the regionalization of anterior neural
plate into an eye field', as evidenced by the expression of eye field
transcription factors (EFTFs) (Zaghloul et al., 2005). The eye field
is further resolved into bilateral eye primordia by the dynamic
expression of EFTFs (Zuber, 2010). However, relatively little is
known about the regulation of EFTF bilateral refinement. EFTFs
are not induced until neurulation and are not exclusively involved
in eye development; Pax6 and Rx1 play important roles in brain
development, neuronal migration and other processes. This
suggests the existence of as yet uncharacterized additional
instructive signal(s) that drive certain embryonic cells specifically
toward eye formation. Recent studies identified a cocktail of factors
that converts animal cap ectoderm to an eye fate (Viczian et al.,
2009; Zuber et al., 2003). Could eyes be induced by an even more
minimal set of signals? And, could eye formation be induced in
vivo at locations far from the anterior neural field? The
identification and characterization of such signals would have
tremendous potential for therapeutic applications, as well as
shedding light on endogenous mechanisms of lineage restriction
and morphogenetic control.
Endogenous steady-state ion currents, voltage gradients and
electric fields produced by ion channels and pumps in all cells (not
just excitable neurons and muscle) are crucial regulators of
patterning (Levin, 2009; McCaig et al., 2009). They control cell
migration (McCaig et al., 2009; Prevarskaya et al., 2010; Yao et al.,
2008; Yasuda and Adams, 2010), proliferation (Blackiston et al.,
2011) and differentiation (Sundelacruz et al., 2009) in a wide
variety of systems. Although epithelial electric fields have been
implicated in adult eye wound healing (Reid et al., 2005; Wang et
al., 2005; Zhao et al., 2006), the roles of ion flows in eye
development have not been explored. In Xenopus laevis, we have
uncovered an endogenous role for plasma membrane voltage
gradients during eye development, and show that artificially
induced changes in transmembrane potential (Vmem) are sufficient
to induce well-formed eyes outside of the anterior neural field.
Thus, Vmem is an important endogenous component of the eye
induction cascade and presents a tractable control point for the
therapeutic induction of visual system tissues.

[PAGE 2] MATERIALS AND METHODS
Animal husbandry and mRNA injection
Xenopus laevis embryos were fertilized in vitro according to standard
protocols (Sive et al., 2000) in 0.1× Marc's Modified Ringer's (MMR; 10
mM Na+, 0.2 mM K+, 10.5 mM CI, 0.2 mM Ca2+, pH 7.8]. Intracellular
ion concentrations in Xenopus are: 21 mM Na⁺¹, 90 mM K+, 60 mM Cl,
0.5 mM Ca2+ (Gillespie, 1983). Xenopus embryos were housed at 14-18°C
and staged according to Faber and Nieuwkoop (Faber and Nieuwkoop,
1967). Capped synthetic mRNAs generated using mMessage mMachine
(Ambion) were resuspended in water and injected (3 nl per blastomere)
into embryos in 3% Ficoll. All experiments were approved by the Tufts
University Animal Research Committee in accordance with the Guide for
Care and Use of Laboratory Animals.

[PAGE 2] Imaging of membrane voltage patterns using CC2-DMPE
Fresh CC2-DMPE (Molecular Probes) stocks (1 mg/ml in DMSO) were
diluted 1:1000 in 0.1× MMR to 0.2 µM. Embryos were soaked in CC2-
DMPE dye for 1.5 hours followed by five washes in 0.1× MMR. Embryos
in 0.1× MMR were imaged using 405 nm excitation and 460 nm emission
on a Nikon AZ100 microscope with an Andor Luca digital CCD camera
and NIS-Elements software.

[PAGE 3] RESULTS
Bilateral hyperpolarized cell clusters appear in the
anterior neural field before formation of eye
primordia in Xenopus
To document real-time changes in Vmem during eye development,
we used the voltage-sensitive dye CC2-DMPE (Wolff et al., 2003)
to detect hyperpolarization in the Xenopus embryo in vivo. A
physiological screen for bioelectric patterns during craniofacial
development (Vandenberg et al., 2011) revealed that, starting at
stage 17/18, normal embryos exhibit two small areas in the anterior
neural field that are bilaterally positioned and hyperpolarized
relative to their neighbors (Fig. 1A, red arrowheads). Whole-cell
electrophysiological recordings of Vmem from these areas and from
the neighboring tissues on the flank of the same embryo (Fig. 1B)
revealed that the CC2-DMPE-demarcated domains were
hyperpolarized relative to neighboring tissues by ~10 mV (also
confirming the ability of the CC2-DMPE dye to detect cells with
hyperpolarized Vmem). Other regions of the embryo also exhibit
interesting distributions of Vmem; these are described elsewhere
(Vandenberg et al., 2011) and will be investigated in subsequent
work.
Vmem collapses upon cell death and thus cannot be imaged
simultaneously with in situ hybridization. We imaged the
hyperpolarized Vmem signal using CC2-DMPE at stage 17/18 and
immediately fixed the embryos for in situ hybridization analysis of
the EFTFs Otx2, Rx1 and Pax6 (Fig. 1C; data not shown). The
relatively broad anterior expression of EFTFs appeared to overlap
with the hyperpolarized cells (Fig. 1C; data not shown).

[PAGE 4] Local perturbation of Vmem causes disruption of
normal eye development
To determine whether hyperpolarization is functionally required for
eye development, we performed a loss-of-function experiment by
depolarizing Vmem of the relevant cells. We used the constitutively
conductive EXP1 cation channel (Beg and Jorgensen, 2003) and
the glycine-gated chloride channel (GlyR) (Davies et al., 2003),
which can be permanently activated by the specific GlyR opener
Ivermectin (IVM) (Shan et al., 2001). The use of two different
molecular reagents (channels that share no sequence or structural
homology and have in common only their effect on membrane
potential) specifically tested the role of Vmem per se, independent
of possible other functions of a particular channel protein or ion
species.
In standard 0.1× MMR medium, these channels work to
depolarize cells (supplementary material Fig. S2A) (Beg and
Jorgensen, 2003; Blackiston et al., 2011; Davies et al., 2003).
Embryos were injected with GlyR or EXP1 mRNA in the dorsal
two cells of the four-cell embryo [the blastomeres from which eyes
derive (Moody, 1987)] (supplementary material Fig. S2Ai) and
were stained with CC2-DMPE dye at stage 19 (supplementary
material Fig. S2Aii). GlyR-injected embryos were treated with the
channel opener IVM from stage 17 to 23 to enable the efflux of
chloride that depolarizes GlyR-expressing cells. In contrast to
uninjected embryos, which show distinct bilaterally hyperpolarized
cell clusters (supplementary material Fig. S2Aiii, green
arrowheads), GlyR and EXP1 misexpression strongly reduced or
disrupted the hyperpolarization pattern in the injected embryos
(supplementary material Fig. S2Aiv). This confirmed that our
reagents produce the expected loss-of-function effect on the
hyperpolarization pattern. We saw no signs of general toxicity or
ill-health from ion channel mRNAs, which were titrated to the
lowest levels needed to produce eye phenotypes: dorsoanterior
index, midline patterning, overall growth rate and proportion, and
behavior were all normal, ruling out simple toxicity as a cause of
eye malformation. Consistent with existing evidence of Vmem
changes being associated with specific tissue outcomes (Blackiston
et al., 2011; Levin et al., 2002; Levin, 2009; Sundelacruz et al.,
2009; Tseng et al., 2010), we occasionally observed additional
interesting patterning phenotypes involving other organs, which
will be characterized in subsequent studies.

[PAGE 5] 
To determine whether the observed hyperpolarization is required
for normal eye development, GlyR or EXP1 mRNA was injected
into the dorsal blastomeres at the four-cell stage and the embryos
scored for eye development at stage 42 (Fig. 2A). Uninjected, lacZ-
injected, GlyR-injected and IVM-treated embryos served as
controls. Control embryos had intact, fully closed, well-formed
eyes (Fig. 2B). By contrast, expression of GlyR plus IVM
treatment, or expression of EXP1 mRNA, caused a high incidence
of disrupted endogenous eye formation (48% and 46%,
respectively; Fig. 2A). Phenotypes included incomplete eye
formation (supplementary material Fig. S2Bi), small
(supplementary material Fig. S2Bii) or absent (Fig. 2B) eyes,
fusion to the brain (supplementary material Fig. S2Biii) and
pigmented optic nerves (supplementary material Fig. S2Biv).
Although bioelectric events can exert effects at long range
(Blackiston et al., 2011; Morokuma et al., 2008), the position of the
bilateral hyperpolarized regions suggested a local role. We
examined the effects of inducing depolarization elsewhere in the
embryo. Injection of GlyR mRNA plus IVM treatment or of EXP1
mRNA into the two ventral blastomeres (which make a minor
contribution, if any, to eye fate lineages) caused no significant
effect on eye development (Fig. 2A). To allow a direct comparison
of the injected and uninjected sides of the same embryo and to
further test the effective range of influence of hyperpolarization,
only one side (one dorsal cell at the four-cell stage) of the embryo
was targeted by depolarizing channel mRNA (GlyR plus IVM, Fig.
2B; EXP1, supplementary material Fig. S2Biii) while leaving the
contralateral side as an internal control. The mRNA was mixed
with a lineage tracer (lacZ mRNA); eye defects occurred only in
regions that had been targeted by the depolarizing mRNA, whereas
normal eye development occurred on the uninjected region of the
same embryo (Fig. 2B; supplementary material Fig. S2Biii). Taken
together, these results demonstrate that the bilateral hyperpolarized
cell clusters in the anterior neural field are an important, specific
component of normal eye development and that this signal works
in a local fashion.

[PAGE 5] Fig. 4. Ectopic eyes induced by Vmem signal are similar to endogenous eyes and exhibit ectopic expression of canonical eye
development factors. (A) Confocal images of sections through endogenous (i,iii,v,vii, ix) and ectopic (ii, iv,vi,viii,x) eyes immunostained for the
retinal differentiation markers Glutamine synthetase (Muller cells, red), Islet-1 (amacrine cells, cyan), XAP2 (rods, yellow) and Calbindin (cones,
green) and representative phase contrast images show similar differentiated retinal cell populations in endogenous and ectopic eyes. (B) Confocal
images of sections through endogenous (i) and ectopic (ii) eyes co-immunostained for retinal cell differentiation markers of rods (yellow), Muller
cells (magenta) and amacrine cells (cyan) and for nuclei (blue) show a similar organization of differentiated retinal cell populations. (C) In situ
hybridization of stage 30 control embryos (i,iii,v) and embryos microinjected with DNKir6.1p mRNA (ii, iv,vi) in all four cells at the four-cell stage for
eye development markers Otx2 (i,ii), Pax6 (iii, iv) and Rx1 (v,vi). Red arrowheads mark ectopic expression, and green arrowheads mark endogenous
expression. No ectopic Otx2 expression is observed in the injected embryos.

that the V_mem signal functions in defining the pattern of these
canonical EFTFs. Analysis of the timing of the bilateral
hyperpolarization signal, the bilateral regionalization of
Rx1/Pax6 expression to eye domains, and the ability of
dominant-negative Pax6 to disturb the normal hyperpolarization
pattern, all suggest a feedback loop between the biophysical and
transcriptional signals. Cross-talk between Pax6 and the V_mem
signal might result in a dynamic bilateral regionalization of the
eye field, similar to the role of progressive depolarization in the
differentiation of human mesenchymal stem cells (Sundelacruz
et al., 2009).

Consistent with the hyperpolarization-induced expression of eye
genes such as Pax6 and Rx1, eye tissue and indeed complete eyes
can be formed by just one ion channel mRNA that modulates V_mem.
Although often only patches of individual tissue (RPE or lens) are
formed, complete whole eyes can be produced that have the tissue
layers and anatomical structure of native eyes. The same phenotype
resulted from induced flows of different ion species and could be
manipulated by direct control of ionic gradients precisely as
predicted by the Goldman equation. These data reveal that eye
induction is mediated by changes in V_mem itself - a physiological
parameter that is not necessarily tied to any one gene product,


[PAGE 5] Table 1. The V_mem eye induction signal is transduced via Ca2+ influx
Phenotype Injected Injected + Fluoxetine (10 μΜ) Injected + Lindane (10 μΜ) Injected + Verapamil (100 μΜ)
No ectopic eye tissue 55 36 33 42
Ectopic eye tissue 17 10 13 2
Total 72 46 46 44
Percentage ectopic eye tissue 23.6 21.7 28.2 4.5


[PAGE 6] DISCUSSION
Morphogenetic roles for V_mem have been demonstrated in egg-
oocyte systems (Woodruff and Telfer, 1980), appendage
regeneration (Adams et al., 2007) and axial patterning (Beane et
al., 2011; Kurtz, and Schrank, 1955; Marsh and Beams, 1947; Shi
and Borgens, 1995) in a wide variety of species (Levin, 2009;
McCaig et al., 2009). Having screened for bioelectrical pre-pattern
during the development of Xenopus embryos (Vandenberg et al.,
2011), we observed a bilateral, distinctly hyperpolarized cluster of
cells in the anterior neural field and show that this
hyperpolarization is required for normal eye development.
Eye defects were induced by two independent means of
depolarizing anterior neural field cells: misexpression of a
depolarizing cation channel (EXP1) or of a chloride channel
(GlyR). In the latter case, modulation of [Cl⁻]_ex allowed control of
the magnitude of the effect (in accordance with the Goldman
equation) (Blackiston et al., 2011). The ability to disrupt eye
development using distinct constructs that mediate the flux of
different ions (sodium, potassium or chloride) and have in common
only their effect on V_mem strongly supports the V_mem signal as a
factor necessary for normal eye development.
Molecular analysis revealed that perturbing the endogenous
V_mem signal altered the endogenous expression pattern of Rx1
and Pax6. Additionally, manipulating the V_mem of non-eye cells
induces de novo Rx1 and Pax6 expression. These results suggest


[PAGE 7] that bioelectric cues are upstream regulators of these key
transcription factors in eye development.
The ability to induce ectopic eyes by misexpression of ion
channels is consistent with the idea that V_mem is not only
necessary but also sufficient to induce eye formation. The
induction of ectopic eyes by misexpression of DNKir6.1p
demonstrates that depolarization is sufficient to induce ectopic
eyes. The fact that ectopic eyes were induced by a variety of ion
channels (DNKir6.1p, DNKir6.1-ER, TRPM7, ENaC and
Nav1.5) that share no sequence or structural homology but do
control V_mem, suggests that the key instructive signal is indeed
carried by V_mem per se, and not by an ion-specific or ion-
independent (e.g. scaffolding) role of our channel constructs.
Moreover, the fact that ectopic eyes were induced by both
depolarizing and hyperpolarizing conditions (DNKir6.1p and
Nav1.5, respectively) suggests that the absolute value of V_mem is
not the key instructive signal. Rather, it is the perturbation of the
endogenous V_mem pattern that is sufficient to induce ectopic
eyes. This is consistent with the observation that ectopic eyes
were induced by both dorsal and ventral injections of
DNKir6.1p, which would be expected to have opposite effects on
the endogenous V_mem gradient.
The ability to induce ectopic eyes by misexpression of ion
channels is consistent with the idea that V_mem is not only
necessary but also sufficient to induce eye formation. The
induction of ectopic eyes by misexpression of DNKir6.1p
demonstrates that depolarization is sufficient to induce ectopic
eyes. The fact that ectopic eyes were induced by a variety of ion
channels (DNKir6.1p, DNKir6.1-ER, TRPM7, ENaC and
Nav1.5) that share no sequence or structural homology but do
control V_mem, suggests that the key instructive signal is indeed
carried by V_mem per se, and not by an ion-specific or ion-
independent (e.g. scaffolding) role of our channel constructs.
Moreover, the fact that ectopic eyes were induced by both
depolarizing and hyperpolarizing conditions (DNKir6.1p and
Nav1.5, respectively) suggests that the absolute value of V_mem is
not the key instructive signal. Rather, it is the perturbation of the
endogenous V_mem pattern that is sufficient to induce ectopic
eyes. This is consistent with the observation that ectopic eyes
were induced by both dorsal and ventral injections of
DNKir6.1p, which would be expected to have opposite effects on
the endogenous V_mem gradient.


[PAGE 8] Our results suggest that the bioelectric signal is transduced
via Ca²⁺ influx. This is consistent with the role of Ca²⁺ as a
second messenger in a variety of signaling pathways, including
those involved in eye development (Nishiyama et al., 2008).
However, the specific downstream targets of Ca²⁺ signaling in
eye induction remain to be identified.
The ability to induce ectopic eyes by modulating V_mem has
important implications for regenerative medicine. The fact that
ectopic eyes can be induced in non-eye tissues suggests that
V_mem could be used to reprogram cells to an eye fate. This
could be useful for treating eye diseases such as macular
degeneration, which is currently incurable.
Our results suggest that V_mem plays a crucial role in eye
development. This bioelectric signal is necessary for the normal
patterning of eye development genes and is sufficient to induce
ectopic eyes. These findings have important implications for our
understanding of eye development and for the development of
new therapies for eye diseases.


[PAGE 9] Acknowledgements
We thank Dr. Richard Harland for providing the Pax6 constructs. We also thank
members of the Levin laboratory for helpful discussions. This work was supported
by NIH grant EY019969. Deposited in GenBank/EMBL/DDBJ under accession
numbers JQ064809, JQ064810, JQ064811.
Competing interests statement
The authors declare no competing financial interests.
Supplementary material
Supplementary material available online at
http://dev.biologists.org/lookup/suppl/doi:10.1242/dev.078397/-/DC1
References
Acampora, D., Mazan, S., Lallemand, Y., Avantaggiato, V., Maury, M., Simeone, A.
and Brulet, P. (1995). Forebrain and midbrain regions are deleted in Otx2-/- mutants due to
a defective anterior neuroectoderm specification during gastrulation. Development 121,
3279-3290.
Adams, D. S., Masi, A. and Levin, M. (2007). H+ pump-dependent changes in membrane
voltage are an early mechanism necessary and sufficient to induce Xenopus tail
regeneration. Development 134, 1323-1335.
Bailey, T. J., El-Hodiri, H., Zhang, L., Shah, R., Mathers, P. H. and Jamrich, M. (2004).
Regulation of vertebrate eye development by Rx genes. Int. J. Dev. Biol. 48, 761-770.
Beane, W. S., Morokuma, J., Adams, D. S. and Levin, M. (2011). A chemical genetics
approach reveals H,K-ATPase-mediated membrane voltage is required for planarian head
regeneration. Chem. Biol. 18, 77-89.
Blackiston, D., Adams, D. S., Lemire, J. M., Lobikin, M. and Levin, M. (2011).
Transmembrane potential of GlyCl-expressing instructor cells induces a neoplastic-like
conversion of melanocytes via a serotonergic pathway. Dis. Model. Mech. 4, 67-85.
Chow, R. L., Altmann, C. R., Lang, R. A. and Hemmati-Brivanlou, A. (1999). Pax6
induces ectopic eyes in Xenopus embryos. Development 126, 4213-4222.
Ficker, E., Taglialatela, M., Wible, B. A., Henley, C. M. and Brown, A. M. (2000).
Spermine and spermidine are essential for inward rectification in Kir2.1 inward rectifier K+
channels. J. Gen. Physiol. 115, 239-255.
Fukumoto, T., Kema, I. P., Germanguz, I., Velasco, J. M., Ishii, T. M., McDonald, T. V.,
Weiss, J. N. and Levin, M. D. (2005). Atrial fibrillation is a self-perpetuating arrhythmia:
dominant role of the inward rectifier potassium current. Circ. Res. 96, 1250-1256.
Gehring, W. J. and Ikeo, K. (1999). Pax 6: mastering eye morphogenesis and eye
evolution. Trends Genet. 15, 371-377.
Huang, S. and Ingber, D. E. (2006). A non-genetic basis for cancer progression and
metastasis: self-organizing attractors in cell regulatory networks. Breast Dis. 26, 27-54.
Ingber, D. E. (2006). Cellular mechanotransduction: putting all the pieces together again.
FASEB J. 20, 811-827.
Kurtz, E. B. and Schrank, A. R. (1955). Bioelectric studies on regenerating limbs of
Amblystoma. Anat. Rec. 122, 573-587.
Levin, M. (2006). Is the morphogenetic code an engineering specification? Int. J. Dev. Biol.
50, 123-135.
Levin, M. (2009). Bioelectric mechanisms in regeneration: unique aspects and future
perspectives. Semin. Cell Dev. Biol. 20, 543-556.
Levin, M., Thorlin, T., Robinson, K. R., Nogi, T. and Mercola, M. (2002). Asymmetries
in H+/K+-ATPase and cell membrane potentials comprise a very early step in left-right
patterning. Cell 111, 77-89.
Lupo, G., Harris, W. A. and Lewis, K. E. (2002). Mechanisms of ventral patterning in the
vertebrate nervous system. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 3, 103-114.
Marsh, G. and Beams, H. W. (1947). Electrical control of morphogenesis in regenerating
Dugesia tigrina. I. Relation of axial polarity to electric currents. J. Cell. Comp. Physiol. 39,
191-213.
McCaig, C. D., Song, B. and Rajnicek, A. M. (2009). Electrical dimensions in cell
science. J. Cell Sci. 122, 4267-4276.
Nakanishi, S. and Okazawa, M. (2006). Membrane potential and calcium influx regulate
differential expression of distinct p75 neurotrophin receptor isoforms. J. Neurosci. 26,
11672-11680.
Nichols, C. G. (2006). KATP channels as molecular sensors of cellular metabolism. Nature
440, 470-476.
Nieuwkoop, P. D. and Faber, J. (1967). Normal Table of Xenopus laevis (Daudin).
Amsterdam: North-Holland Publishing Company.
Nishiyama, A., Mikoshiba, K. and Kuroiwa, A. (2008). InsP3 receptor-mediated Ca2+
signaling and its role in the development of the mouse nervous system. J. Neurochem. 106,
482-492.
Schwappach, B., Zerangue, N., Jan, Y. N. and Jan, L. Y. (2000). Molecular basis for K+
channel blocking by the sulphonylurea drug glibenclamide. EMBO J. 19, 1591-1599.
Shi, R. and Borgens, R. B. (1995). Three-dimensional gradients of voltage during
development of the nervous system as invisible coordinates for the establishment of
embryonic pattern. Dev. Dyn. 202, 101-114.
Sundelacruz, S., Levin, M. and Kaplan, D. L. (2009). Membrane potential controls
differentiation of prestalk cells in Dictyostelium. Development 136, 949-956.
Vandenberg, L. N., Morrie, R. D. and Adams, D. S. (2011). Vmem in Xenopus
embryos: regional differences and neural induction. Dev. Dyn. 240, 1251-1260.
Woodruff, R. I. and Telfer, W. H. (1980). Electrophoresis of proteins in intercellular bridges.
Nature 286, 84-86.
Zaghloul, N. A., Moody, S. A. and Stearman, R. S. (2005). Molecular analysis of
Xenopus retinal ganglion cell development. Dev. Dyn. 234, 345-359.
Zuber, M. E., Gestri, G., Viczian, A. S., Barsacchi, G. and Harris, W. A. (2003).
Specification of the vertebrate eye by a network of eye field transcription factors.
Development 130, 5155-5167.
DEVELOPMENT

[PAGE 9] 
Phase contrast
ix
Cones
320 RESEARCH ARTICLE
Fig. 4. Ectopic eyes induced by Vmem signal are similar to endogenous eyes and exhibit ectopic expression of canonical eye
development factors. (A) Confocal images of sections through endogenous (i,iii,v,vii, ix) and ectopic (ii, iv,vi,viii,x) eyes immunostained for the
retinal differentiation markers Glutamine synthetase (Muller cells, red), Islet-1 (amacrine cells, cyan), XAP2 (rods, yellow) and Calbindin (cones,
green) and representative phase contrast images show similar differentiated retinal cell populations in endogenous and ectopic eyes. (B) Confocal
images of sections through endogenous (i) and ectopic (ii) eyes co-immunostained for retinal cell differentiation markers of rods (yellow), Muller
cells (magenta) and amacrine cells (cyan) and for nuclei (blue) show a similar organization of differentiated retinal cell populations. (C) In situ
hybridization of stage 30 control embryos (i,iii,v) and embryos microinjected with DNKir6.1p mRNA (ii, iv,vi) in all four cells at the four-cell stage for
eye development markers Otx2 (i,ii), Pax6 (iii, iv) and Rx1 (v,vi). Red arrowheads mark ectopic expression, and green arrowheads mark endogenous
expression. No ectopic Otx2 expression is observed in the injected embryos.

that the Vmem signal functions in defining the pattern of these
canonical EFTFs. Analysis of the timing of the bilateral
hyperpolarization signal, the bilateral regionalization of
Rx1/Pax6 expression to eye domains, and the ability of
dominant-negative Pax6 to disturb the normal hyperpolarization
pattern, all suggest a feedback loop between the biophysical and
transcriptional signals. Cross-talk between Pax6 and the Vmem
signal might result in a dynamic bilateral regionalization of the
eye field, similar to the role of progressive depolarization in the
differentiation of human mesenchymal stem cells (Sundelacruz
et al., 2009).

Table 1. The Vmem eye induction signal is transduced via Ca2+ influx

[PAGE 10]
Membrane potential controls eye development
much as substrate geometry is now known to be a physical
parameter controlling cell behavior (Chen et al., 1998; Dike et al.,
1999). This is a desirable property from the perspective of
developing biomedical applications because interventions (e.g.
small-molecule drug cocktails designed to control Vmem in key cell
groups) are not dependent on any one protein but can take
advantage of convenient channels or pumps expressed in the host.

RESEARCH ARTICLE 321
Our data show that the bilateral hyperpolarizing Vmem signal in
the anterior neural field plays a crucial role in regionalization of
EFTF expression and thus eye development. Upon perturbation of
the bilateral Vmem signal, a major proportion of the malformed eye
phenotypes (74%) represent failure of eye field separation (e.g.
eyes fused to brain, eyes fused along midline, and eyes with
pigmented optic nerve/stalk). We propose a hypothetical model in

Fig. 5. Model integrating the Vmem signal into eye development and depicting the effects of its change on endogenous and ectopic
eye development. (A) Neural induction is crucial in the process of eye development. Bilateral hyperpolarization of a cluster of cells in the anterior
neural field regulates the expression pattern of eye development markers (EFTFs) such as Rx1 and Pax6. Note that there is a positive-feedback loop
between factors such as Pax6 and local hyperpolarization. (B) Eye development factor expression in relation to changes in Vmem. Normal eye
development involves regulation of bilateral patterning of EFTFs by the bilateral Vmem signal (hyperpolarization). Underlying mesodermal inhibitory
signal also plays an important role in this bilateral regionalization of EFTFs. Disruption of the bilateral Vmem signal results in diminished or lost EFTF
signal, resulting in disrupted endogenous eye development. Induction of ectopic Vmem changes results in de novo EFTF expression and formation of
ectopic eyes. (C) Hyperpolarization within a window of Vmem is important for the proper formation and development of eyes. Perturbation
(depolarization, 1) of endogenous Vmem signal takes the cells outside this window and results in improper eye development. Perturbation
(depolarization, 2) of Vmem of non-eye cells, such that their Vmem now lies within the window of eye formation, results in the formation of ectopic
eye tissue by these cells. Perturbation (depolarization, 3 and 4) of Vmem in non-eye cells, such that their Vmem still does not fall within the eye
formation window, does not result in ectopic eye tissue formation from these cells.


[PAGE 11]
322 RESEARCH ARTICLE
which feedback between Vmem and Pax6 establishes a stable,
bilaterally regionalized pattern of Pax6 and other EFTF expression
(Fig. 5A). Conversely, induction of an appropriate Vmem signal in
non-eye cells results in ectopic induction and maintenance of
EFTFs, driving the formation of ectopic eye tissues, perhaps by
establishing the same stable feedback loop.
Neural tissue and Otx2 expression are thought to be crucial for eye
induction (Zuber et al., 2003). The ability to form ectopic eyes
without induction of additional primary axes or central nervous
system tissue (lack of ectopic Otx2) is very interesting and suggests
a more direct (downstream) linkage of Vmem to eye-specific cascades
(Fig. 5A). Indeed, bioelectrically induced eyes can be formed on the
gut or within lateral mesoderm – non-neural tissues outside the
known competence lineage for eyes. Similarly, patches of lens/retina
readily form in the tail. By contrast, Pax6 alone is incapable of
initiating an eye field in regions outside the competent neurectoderm,
suggesting that additional factors might also be involved in positive-
feedback interactions with Vmem. However, Vmem is able to initiate
not only Pax6 expression but also the conditions that make tissues
competent to form eyes upon Pax6 transcription.
Temporally and spatially restricted hyperpolarization has
previously been shown to drive cellular fate (Hinard et al., 2008;
Konig et al., 2004; Konig et al., 2006; Sundelacruz et al., 2009).
Moreover, specific cellular responses to windows of Vmem have
also been documented (Gruler and Nuccitelli, 1991; Jurkat-Rott et
al., 2009; McDonald et al., 1972). Our data suggest the presence of
a narrow hyperpolarization range that specifies the Vmem signal for
eye induction (Fig. 5C). Cells that are normally more strongly
hyperpolarized than the eye-specific Vmem values can be driven into
this range by depolarizing channels, whereas cells that are normally
depolarized will be pushed into this range by hyperpolarizing
channels. Accordingly, both depolarizing (dominant-negative KATP)
and hyperpolarizing (Kv1.5) channels are capable of inducing
ectopic eyes. The consequences of changes in Vmem (by altering
[Na⁺]ex) in Nav1.5-injected embryos also support the induction of
ectopic eye tissues when cells are moved into a narrow range of
Vmem. Together, these data suggest a specific range of Vmem values
for eye induction – changes in Vmem to levels above or below this
target range do not result in eye induction. Also in line with this
model, depolarization of endogenous eye field cells represses or
disrupts eye formation by driving the Vmem of these cells out of the
'normal' permissive range. The narrow range of eye-compatible
Vmem values is in line with our observation that only a small subset
of injected cells within any tadpole form ectopic eye tissues.
In conclusion, we have characterized a Vmem-mediated signal
that is necessary for patterning of Pax6 and Rx1 expression during
normal eye development. This Vmem signal is also sufficient for
induction of ectopic EFTF expression and eye formation. Vmem-
induced ectopic eyes are formed in regions far outside the anterior
neural tissues, which were conventionally thought to be the only
region competent to form eyes. The discovery of bioelectrical
signals that initiate the development of an organ as complex as the
eye paves the way to important future work on the developmental
and evolutionary roles of ion channel- and pump-derived gradients
as mediators of patterning during embryogenesis. Moreover, the
ability of changes in Vmem to initiate the formation of a complete
vertebrate organ suggests a potential class of novel strategies for
regenerative medicine and repair of birth defects (Levin, 2009).

[PAGE 12]
Acknowledgements
We thank Punita Koustubhan, Amber Currier and Claire Stevenson for
Xenopus husbandry and general laboratory assistance; Daryl Davies and
Miriam Fine for the GlyCl expression construct; Franz Oswald for EosFP, Sally
Moody for Xenopus Shh and Manuel Kukuljan for Nav1.5 constructs; Ali
Hemmati-Brivanlou for DNPax6 and the Pax6 antisense probe; Florian Lang for
Kv1.5 plasmid; Erik Jorgensen for EXP1 plasmid; Michael Zuber for Rx1
antisense probe; Valerie Schneider for Otx2 antisense probe; and Dany S.
Adams and Brook Chernet for microscopy assistance. The XAP2 and anti-Islet-
1 antibodies developed by D. S. Sakaguchi and W. A. Harris and by T. M.
Jessell and S. Brenner-Morton, respectively, were obtained from the
Developmental Studies Hybridoma Bank (DSHB) developed under the auspices
of the NICHD and maintained by The University of lowa, Department of
Biology, Iowa City, IA 52242, USA.

Funding
This work was supported by the National Institutes of Health (NIH) [EY018168
to M.L.]. S.A. was funded by the Agency for Science, Technology and Research
(Singapore). M.L. is also grateful for the support of the G. Harold and Leila Y.
Mathers Charitable Foundation. Deposited in PMC for release after 12 months.

Competing interests statement
The authors declare no competing financial interests.