Editorial: Interplay Between Ion
Channels, the Nervous System, and
Embryonic Development
Michael Levin¹ and Angeles B. Ribera 2*
1 Department of Biology and Allen Discovery Center at Tufts University, Medford, MA, United States, 2 Department of
Physiology and Biophysics, University of Colorado School of Medicine, Denver, CO, United States

Keywords: ion channels, development, embryo, nervous system, bioelectricity

[PAGE 1] Editorial on the Research Topic
Interplay Between Ion Channels, the Nervous System, and Embryonic Development

Ion channels play fundamental second-to-second roles in maintaining appropriate ion gradients
and membrane potentials for all cells, enabling rapid signaling in excitable cells and standing
patterns of voltage in non-excitable tissues. Recent work has revealed that ion channels play
critical roles in development of excitable and non-excitable cells and organs, neural degeneration,
disease and tissue remodeling/cellular regeneration (Bates, 2015). Examples of ion channels with
associated channelopathies that have revealed such novel roles include Kv3.1, Kir2.1, Kir7.1, and
GIRK2 (Belus et al., 2018). Elucidation of these non-conventional roles of ion channels will provide
entree' into novel mechanisms that underlie development, degeneration and/or regeneration of
excitable and non-excitable cells (Levin and Martyniuk, 2018). Moreover, as ion channels serve
as potential drug targets, elucidation of their non-traditional roles will allow for innovative new
therapeutic approaches targeting bioelectric state (Churchill et al., 2018), as has already been shown
for regenerative applications (Tseng et al., 2010) and cancer (Arcangeli et al., 2012).

This Research Topic focuses on non-conventional roles played by ion channels in development,
disease, and repair of excitable and non-excitable tissues. Here, we briefly summarize the areas
covered by each article in this collection. Together, the articles cover a wide spectrum of issues in
the field.

The disease conditions that arise from mutations in ion channels are known as channelopathies.
Tyagi et al. review the diverse range of channelopathy symptoms that arise from the numerous
mutations that have been discovered in the human gene CACNAIA that encodes the calcium
channel Cav2.1. An important major point of their review is the need to determine not only the
direct effect of the mutation on channel function as well as the effect of the mutant channel in a
physiological context. When studied in the “reduced" context of a heterologous expression system,
the direct biophysical effect of a mutation on channel function is most easily discerned. However, it
is often difficult to extrapolate the ultimate consequence of the mutant channel when it functions in
a native context. In this regard, they highlight the advantages of the zebrafish as a model system for
study of the mechanistic basis of the effects of calcium channelopathies. The zebrafish model has
previously advanced a mechanistic understanding of how mutations in the human SCNIA sodium
channel have the potential to alter cellular and network excitability and lead to Dravet syndrome
(Hortopan et al., 2010). These considerations need to be kept in mind for interpretation and
inferences regarding implications for therapeutic approaches. Moreover, the zebrafish model has
shown that ion channel effects can be exerted non-cell autonomously as well as cell autonomously
(Pineda et al., 2006; Wright and Ribera, 2010). The paper forms a nice complement to past studies
of developmental roles of channels in zebrafish morphogenesis
and its disorders (Perathoner et al., 2014; Silic and Zhang, 2018;
Lanni et al., 2019).

[PAGE 2] Non-excitable as well as excitable cells express ion channels,
often during early stages of differentiation. Ozekin et al. focus
on the ion channel Kir2.1 and its role in bone development
with a focus on craniofacial morphogenesis. Interestingly, this
ion channel has also been implicated in other developmental
processes, e.g., Drosophila wing development (Dahal et al., 2012,
2017; George et al., 2019). Importantly, several teratogens target
ion channels that play development roles (Hernandez-Diaz and
Levin, 2014). The recent vaping surge highlights the importance
of understanding the effects of nicotine on ion channels that
play developmental roles. The studies reviewed highlight the
importance of the concept of “developmental bioelectricity" in
the context of the embryo.

Goyal et al. review studies of the ontogeny of ion currents in
developing nervous systems. They highlight roles of ion channels
in neural tube formation, and the molecular mechanisms
downstream of their function that guide cell proliferation
and differentiation (Spitzer et al., 2013). The regulation of
morphogenetic and cellular processes by electrical activity is
shown to be critical for the development of the vertebrate
nervous system.

Pai et al. study the role of bioelectric prepatterns in
establishment of the correct size and shape of the frog
embryo brain. Prior work has shown that mutations and
exposure to teratogens can cause developmental malformations
via disruption of the sharp voltage differences between
compartments of the endogenous bioelectric prepattern that sets
the size and shape of the brain (Pai et al., 2015a,b, 2017, 2018).
Here, they show that up-regulation of context-sensitive channels,
such as HCN2 (identified by a computational strategy), sharpens
voltage boundaries and rescues the normal bioelectric prepattern,
which in turn restores gene expression, brain morphogenesis,
and cognitive function despite the presence of strong teratogens.
They use a computational model to predict, and validate, repair
via HCN2 expression induced in tissues far away from the brain
(such as in the ventral gut region), or via systemic exposure to
drugs already approved for human use.

Alicea reviews the cell and molecular data on the origin
of the invariant structure of the C. elegans embryo. Studying
the connectome of the emerging organism (Barabasi and
Barabasi, 2020), they propose a model of synaptic connectivity
that reveals design principles of electrical networks, which
help understand the life and function of this important
model system. Characterizing these earliest events of the
cooperation of the genetic and biophysical layers is critical
for both understanding the ontogeny of bioelectric gradients
and for fully appreciating the evolutionary dynamics that can
take advantage of the interplay between these two layers of
morphogenetic control.

Together, these studies reveal the richness of the emerging
roles of ion channel activity in health and disease. These studies
contribute to a field with many implications for basic knowledge
about the processing of information by biophysical mechanisms
in living tissue, driving biomedical applications based on
modulating ionic communication during health and disease.


[PAGE 3] AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS

ML and AR wrote the manuscript and approved the final version
for publication. Both authors contributed to the article and
approved the submitted version.