REVIEW
Charging Ahead: Examining the Future Therapeutic
Potential of Electroceuticals
Swarnalatha Balasubramanian, David A. Weston, Michael Levin,
and Devon Charles Cardoso Davidian*

Electroceuticals derived from electronic and pharmaceuticals is a term coined
to describe the therapeutic manipulation of neuronal signaling. In recent
years, the complexity and range of applications of electroceuticals have grown
considerably. Therefore, here a revised ontology and framework for defining
electroceuticals that broadens the concept beyond neuron-targeted
interventions is suggested. This more inclusive framework aims to provide
greater coherence and bring together different stakeholders to accelerate
progress in this field. It is suggested that electroceuticals can be categorized
according to the level of physiology for which they act: cellular, tissue, organ,
and systemic. Emerging developments for each category of electroceuticals
and future directions are discussed from a pharmaceutical industry
perspective. Potential challenges are highlighted for translation of
electroceuticals, such as a lack of clinical biomarkers and incomplete
understanding of mechanisms of action and offer solutions for stimulating
progress in this exciting field.

[PAGE 1] 1. Introduction
Electroceuticals originating from the combination of electronic
and pharmaceuticals describes the manipulation of neuronal
signaling using devices for therapeutic
effect. [1] Since its inception, the field has un-
dergone substantial evolution.

The nervous system plays a key role in
regulating functional and homeostatic pro-
cesses in the body; therefore, its modula-
tion via electroceuticals has powerful po-
tential for treating diseases (Figure 1). In
particular, the development of new genetic,
biochemical, and bioinformatics technolo-
gies have supported an improved under-
standing of the cellular mechanisms under-
pinning neuronal communication. In par-
allel, the emergence of the research field
of developmental bioelectricity has revealed
that this phenomenon is an important me-
diator of the phenotypes and functions of
cells and tissues at multiple levels. This re-
cent research has also extended the role
of ion-driven electrical communication be-
yond neurons to various cell types. This
opens possibilities for intervention in diverse areas such
as birth defects, oncology, neurodegeneration, and metabolic
diseases. [2-4]

Despite possessing high therapeutic potential and garner-
ing significant initial industry interest, [7,8] pharmaceutical com-
panies have only explored electroceuticals to a limited extent.
Pharma involvement could be beneficial in many ways for help-
ing electroceuticals reach their therapeutic potential, including
providing expertise in clinical trial design/know-how, designing
combination strategies with pharmaceuticals, and scaling valida-
tion and distribution of innovative therapies.

In this review, we suggest a revised ontology and framework
for defining electroceuticals that reflects a broadening of the con-
cept beyond devices and neural targets, and incorporates recent
developments in bioelectricity research, with the aim of bringing
greater coherence and inclusivity to the field. By exploring the ex-
citing scientific progress in electroceuticals and outlining some
of the outstanding challenges, we aim to bolster their application
to a wider set of disease areas and encourage diverse stakehold-
ers, including both academia and industry, to collaborate in max-
imizing the therapeutic potential of electroceuticals.

[PAGE 1] 2. Electroceuticals: The Need for a Revised
Ontology and Framework

Electroceuticals encompasses well-established therapeutic inter-
ventions such as pacemakers, cochlear, and retinal implants.
Over 20 years ago, Tracey and Tak and coworkers' groundbreak-
ing research characterizing the vagal inflammatory reflex pre-
sented the initial evidence of the neural control of immune
system. This revelation underscored the potential for more tar-
geted electrical therapies, grounded in a comprehensive under-
standing of the underlying biology.[9,10] This potential has now
been illustrated by the emergence of therapies including CVRx's
Barostim Baroreflex activation therapy, which electronically stim-
ulates the autonomic nervous system to treat symptoms of heart
failure, [11] and SetPoint medical's implant, which uses targeted
electric pulses to trigger the intrinsic inflammatory reflex and
treat rheumatoid arthritis (RA), is currently undergoing clinical
evaluation. [12]

Given the growth in complexity, and application of these tech-
nologies, as well as the need to highlight and reconcile overlap of
electroceuticals with the bioelectricity field, we have revisited the
classic definition of electroceuticals to suggest a new ontology.
This ontology could offer the following benefits:

1) Aligning Terminology and Definitions: The term "electro-
ceuticals" has been interchangeably used with bioelec-
tronic medicine (BEM), electrical nerve stimulation, and
neuromodulation, [13] grouping together technologies with a
range of specificities and modes of application, and creating
ambiguity within the field. A revised ontology that subdivides
applications would help more effectively discriminate the
mechanisms and anticipated impact of different interventions.
2) Broadening beyond Neuron-Targeted Devices: Electroceuticals is
a term often used to describe devices that target electrical sig-
naling in nerves, reflecting the focus for scientific development
and commercialization. However, electrical signaling governs
cellular, tissue, organ, and system-wide processes beyond neu-
ronal tissues, necessitating recognition of the broader applica-
tions of electroceuticals. [14]

In addition, because non-neuronal cellular interfaces for bio-
electric circuits within the body consists of ion channels and
electrical synapses, ion-channel-targeting compounds (many of
which are already approved for other purposes) represent a pow-
erful class of electroceuticals.[2,15] Similarly, recently developed
techniques yet to show clinical success should also be considered,
such as optogenetic approaches that use light to electrically con-
trol tumorigenesis[16] or induce regenerative repair.[17]

We therefore believe that a clearer and more inclusive frame-
work with consistent terminology to describe electroceuticals will
be helpful for understanding and appreciating the full range of
their potential applications, providing more coherence and ac-
celerating progress in the field. It is to be noted that EndoNovo
Therapeutics Inc. has trademarked the term "electroceuticals" for
specific commercial purposes. We use the term "electroceuticals"
in the paper to describe the field and as such used for information
purposes only.

[PAGE 2] 3. Re-Defining Electroceuticals

Based on their therapeutic potential, and the needs listed above,
we propose a revised definition and ontology for electroceuticals:
the use of a therapeutic intervention to treat or prevent disease
through the alteration of electrical signals in excitable or nonex-
citable cells.

We have used the broad term "therapeutic intervention" to en-
compass both the major products available today; drugs and de-
vices, as well as new modalities that could be utilized in the fu-
ture. Similarly, the applications of electroceuticals are intention-
ally broad, to cover a range of potential therapeutic benefits, from
symptomatic to disease-modifying interventions, or even preven-
tion and repair of birth defects, injuries, and other disease states.
We have widened the targets of electroceuticals beyond neurons
to include excitable and nonexcitable cells. In addition, "alter-
ation" covers the gamut of potential modifications: stimulatory,
inhibitory, normalizing, etc. and can be achieved via manipula-
tion of inherent electrical signals or by introducing external elec-
trical stimuli.

Building on this definition we also suggest a potential ontology
for bioelectric research according to the physiological level that
they target (Figure 2):

1) Cellular level bioelectric signaling
2) Tissue level bioelectric signaling
3) Organ level bioelectric signaling
4) Systems level bioelectric signaling

At each physiological level, nondevice-driven therapeutic ap-
proaches manipulating bioelectric signaling through cellular or
molecular biochemistry would be known as bioelectroceuticals
while the application of exogenous electric stimuli via devices
would be known as bioelectronic medicine or BEM (Table 1).

In the following sections, we explore each of these product
classes, outlining the applications and challenges for each prod-
uct class, and highlighting examples to illustrate the application
of this novel framework.

[PAGE 3] 3.1. Cellular Level Bioelectric Signaling

Cellular level bioelectric signaling examines inter- and intracel-
lular electrical signaling mediated by changes in resting mem-
brane potential (Vmem) in cells, which is governed by ion (K+, Na+,
Ca2+, and Cl-) flow across the plasma membrane. [15,18] Bioelec-
trical signals produced by ion channels are transduced into sec-
ondary messenger responses, altering key aspects of cell behavior
such as proliferation, differentiation, apoptosis, and migration.

An interesting subcategory of cellular level bioelectric signal-
ing occurs at the organelle and molecular level. This electric
signaling is mediated by intracellular signaling cascades and
is essential for homeostasis in organelles such as the nuclear
envelope, mitochondria, endoplasmic reticulum, phagosomes,
and lysosomes. [19] For instance, in human dermal stem cells
and mouse neural stem cells, two subpopulations of mitochon-
dria with varying mitochondrial membrane potential (Am) have
been identified. [20] Cells with low Aym are dormant stem cells re-
quired to sustain a neuronal precursor pool whereas high Ay m
stem cells are prone to neuronal differentiation. This could pro-
vide an alternative approach to current protocols for neuronal
differentiation by simply modulating mitochondrial potential.
Organelle level bioelectric signaling is a nascent research area,
partly owing to the lack of tools to measure voltage gradient
across organelle membranes, which is an active area of method
development. [21] At the molecular level, alternating electric field
has been shown to degrade magnetite-bound protein aggregates
in Alzheimer's disease via an electro-Fenton effect generated by
electric-field-sensitized magnetite.[22,23] In another study, elec-
trical stimulation (EStim) administered via gold nanoparticles
functionalized with redox active molecules was shown to initiate
quantum biological tunneling for electron transfer and triggered
selective apoptosis of cancer cells.[24]

[PAGE 3] 3.1.1. Applications

The applications of cellular level bioelectric signaling are multi-
fold and include embryogenesis, metabolism, quorum sensing,
and biofilm formation in bacteria [25] and cancer. [26] Herein, we
discuss two of the applications where there has been much re-
cent progress:

1) Stem Cells: Recent studies examining the role of bioelec-
tric signaling in stem cells have demonstrated a functional role
for endogenous electrical signaling in maintaining proliferative
states and inducing differentiation.[27-29] For instance, studies in
Drosophila gut identified conserved pathways (such as mGluR)
that link bioelectric regulators of Ca2+, Na+, and Cl with in-
testinal stem cell proliferation. [30,31] In both human mesenchy-
mal and cardiac stem cells, the big potassium (BK) channel
has been shown to be a key regulator of proliferation, self-
renewal, and hyperpolarization-induced differentiation. [32] The
role of mechanosensitive ion-channel-triggered Ca2+ in stem cell
proliferation, differentiation, and migration has also only been
recently realized. [33-35] Vmem has been shown to drive the exit
from pluripotency and the onset of germ layer differentiation
(cell fate commitment) during embryonic development via cal-
cium and mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) signaling
pathways.[36] Under the new terminology, therapeutics manipu-
lating these endogenous cellular bioelectric signaling fall under
cellular bioelectroceuticals.

Exogenous EStim has also been shown to influence stem cell
fate and is relevant in both in vitro and in vivo culture settings
(Figure 3a). [37-39] EStim of human-induced pluripotent stem cells
(iPSCs) cultured in a conductive polymer system could induce
multilineage differentiation and a robust neuronal fate. [40] In an-
other study, EStim of stem cells transplanted in a conductive poly-
mer system has been shown to improve functional stroke recov-
ery in rodents.[41] Under the new terminology, these examples
fall under cellular BEMs. Overall, manipulation of cellular level
bioelectric signaling provides a novel and alternative way to con-
trol stem cell behavior and could have an impact in regenerative
medicine.

2) Cancer: Misregulation of ion channels has long been linked
to cancer. [43] However, more recently the role of resting mem-
brane potential has been explored, with changes in Vmem be-
ing associated with increased cell proliferation, invasion, and
metastasis[44] (and in general, loss of cooperativity toward normal
morphostasis).[45] The bioelectrical properties of individual can-
cer cells differ vastly from their normal counterparts (Figure 3b);
their Vmem values are more depolarized (-5 to −40 mV vs −40
to -90 mV in normal epithelial cells) and they have dysregulated
ion-channel expression and activity.[42] This work is now being
extended to human glioblastoma (GBM) [46] and breast cancer. [47]
Classic research by Cone has shown that mitosis and Vmem
are correlated in somatic cells, with proliferation being induced
by sustained depolarization in terminally differentiated cells.[48]
More recently, Xenopus studies have shown that when messenger
RNA (mRNA) of a hyperpolarizing potassium channel (Kir2.1)
is co-injected with an oncogene, tumor incidence is signifi-
cantly reduced, while depolarization resulted in increased tumor
incidence.[49] The Xenopus work has also informed applications
in human cells; for example, repurposed ion-channel drugs have
recently been used to target bioelectric properties in GBM cells,
suppressing tumor growth and driving the cells toward a differ-
entiated and senescent phenotype.[46] The Djamgoz laboratory
proposed the "Celex (cellular excitability) hypothesis" of metasta-
sis, which suggests that electrical excitability makes cancer cells
hyperactive, disruptive, invasive, and ultimately metastatic.[50-52]
In parallel, Hancock and co-workers have uncovered an electric
control mechanism in cancer growth, showing that Vmem mod-
ulates plasma membrane phospholipid dynamics and K-Ras sig-
naling, which are associated with cell division. [53] These and other
studies[54] have provided data indicating that ion-channel modu-
lators, cellular bioelectroceuticals, could be an important emerg-
ing class of cancer drugs.[55-57]


[PAGE 4] 3.1.2. Challenges

Despite the growing number of academic researchers working
in cellular level bioelectric signaling, there are inconsistencies in
data and conflicting results from different groups. [58] The main
challenges in translating this concept into the clinic are as fol-
lows:

1) Incomplete Biological Understanding: Several questions remain
before we understand the molecular and cellular mechanisms
that underpin bioelectric signaling. For example, how does bio-
electricity influence the fate of different cell types? Which genes
and pathways are involved? Does this vary from cell to cell, and
disease to disease? Cancer cells and immune cells behave in
fundamentally different but complementary ways to changes
in ionic levels and Vmem. [59,60]
2) Lack of High-Throughput Screens and Relevant Models: How do
we study and screen for compounds that alter cellular level bio-
electric signaling in vitro? Patch clamp is the gold standard for
measuring Vmem, but is labor intensive and low throughput.
Use of fluorescent dyes such as bis-(1,3-dibutylbarbituric acid)
trimethine oxonol (DIBAC₄(3)) are an alternative, but the fluo-
rescent gradient is small, sensitive to differences in normaliza-
tion and only semiquantitative. Clustered regularly interspaced
short palindromic repeats (CRISPR) screens have been helpful
in elucidating the functions of various proteins but do not pro-
vide information on the functional (i.e., open or closed) state
of ion channels and how this influences Vmem. Simple in vivo
systems such as Xenopus tadpoles and zebrafish have been use-
ful to study organism level responses to bioelectricity. How-
ever, translation remains a considerable challenge when con-
sidering the scale and complexity of the gaps between these
model organisms and humans. The emergence of new and ro-
bust methods for studying cellular bioelectroceuticals, [57] and
screening for compounds that alter Vmem, could help to acceler-
ate progress from concept to the clinic.
3) Locally Targeted Modulation of Bioelectricity to Bring about a De-
sired Therapeutic Effect: How can we selectively alter or restore
the Vem of diseased cells or stem cells? Which ion channel
or combination thereof provides the desired change in Vmem?
Should we drive cells toward a hyperpolarized or depolarized
state, and how will this influence cell fate? How much change
in Vmem is needed to achieve the desired cellular effect? What
would be the effects of cellular resistance to an electrical pertur-
bation? Some of these questions are beginning to be addressed
as computational tools such as machine learning and bioelec-
tric simulators are being used for predictive control of bioelec-
tric states. [61,62]

Addressing these challenges will collectively improve our un-
derstanding of the mechanisms of cellular level bioelectric signal-
ing and equip us with the tools to screen and develop approaches
for therapeutic modulation.

[PAGE 5] 3.2. Tissue Level Bioelectric Signaling
Electrical signals are inherent to most tissues and vary depending
on the specific state of the tissue: development, injury, diseased,
or healthy. Electric currents have been measured, for example,
in tissue development, wound healing,[63] bacterial infection of
the gut epithelium, [64] and tumor tissue.[65] Consequently, intro-
ducing external electric stimuli into tissues can alter the course
of development [66] and healing. [67] We discuss three of the most
advanced applications in this category in further detail.

3.2.1. Appplications
1) Wound Healing: In wounds, an endogenous electrical field is
generated across the injured tissue, [68] the strength of which is
dependent on the tissue type.[69] The transepithelial membrane
potential collapses at the site of the wound to zero compared with
the unwounded epidermis,[63] creating an electrical gradient that
provides the cue for directed cell migration into the wound (elec-
trotaxis; Figure 4a).[70] The importance of this bioelectric cue is
highlighted by its ability to override other directional cues for
cell migration in wound healing.[71] Endogenous electric fields in
wounds were first observed 150 years ago, [68] but it was not until
2006 that the first genes, Phosphoinositide 3-kinase/Phosphatase
and tensin homolog (PI3 kinase/PTEN), that control electrotaxis
were identified. [72] Vomaris utilizes this principle of electrotaxis
in their moisture-activated bioelectric dressing (Procellera), com-
prised of elemental silver and elemental zinc embedded in a
substrate.[73] When applied to the injury, microcurrents similar
to the skin's physiological electric field are generated wirelessly
via a redox reaction, promoting wound healing and exerting an
antimicrobial effect. [74,75]
2) Tumor Tissue: A recent addition to cancer treatment is
tumor-treating electrical fields (TTFields), which are locally ap-
plied to tumor tissue to disrupt proliferation and stimulate apop-
tosis of cancer cells (Figure 4b). [76,77] TTFields are low intensity
(1-3 V cm-¹), intermediate frequency (100–300 kHz) alternating
electric fields (100 000–300 000 times s¯¹) tuned specifically to
target cancer cells, while leaving quiescent cells intact.
Two specific mechanisms for the effects of TTFields on cancer
cells have been proposed. [78,79] In the first, TTFields disrupt the
positioning of polar cell proteins such as tubulin and septin, thus
interfering with the formation of a functional mitotic spindle dur-
ing metaphase. In the second, TTFields elicit a nonuniform in-
tracellular electric field during cytokinesis, which acts on polariz-
able structures such as microtubules, organelles, ions, proteins,
and DNA. This leads to structural disruption and impaired cell
division.
Novocure has been developing TTFields since 2000, and
the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has approved
them for recurrent GBM, newly diagnosed GBM and mesothe-
lioma (sold as Optune and Optune Lua). Novocure is currently
evaluating TTFields in combination with the anti-PD-1 (anti-
Programmed Death-1) therapy KEYTRUDA (pembrolizumab)
for the treatment of non-small cell lung cancer (KEYNOTE-B36
trial) [80] and newly diagnosed GBM (EF-41/KEYNOTE D58)[81] in
a collaboration with MSD (tradename of Merck & Co., Inc., Rah-
way, NJ, USA).
3) Engineered Tissue: Electrical signaling can also be employed
to improve tissue engineering. [66,82] In matured cardiac tissue,
electrical signal activation is regulated by exchange of ions via
voltage-gated sodium or potassium channels and propagated via
conduction of these signals through gap junctions. To reproduce
the maturity and function in an engineered tissue, researchers
have utilized EStim and mechanical stimulation (MStim) of
cardiomyocytes. [83,84] For example, applying pulsed electrical sig-
nals at 3 V cm-¹ amplitude and 3 Hz frequency resulted in sig-
nificant structural organization (as measured by cell elongation,
tissue compactness, and protein levels) and contractile behav-
ior (as measured by excitation threshold, maximum capture rate,
and amplitude of contraction) in vitro. [85] Such effects were also
observed in vivo using a tissue engineering chamber to culture
and electrically stimulate human iPSC-derived cardiomyocytes,
resulting in a compact and vascularized cardiac tissue.[86] In the
case of bone defect repair, piezoelectric biomaterials have also
been shown to induce vascularized bone regeneration through
microcurrent stimulation and Zn2+ enrichment.[87]

[PAGE 6] 3.2.2. Challenges
The effects of bioelectric signaling at the tissue level have been
explored in limited contexts by only a few companies and their
academic collaborators. While the clinical data from these groups
look promising and have led to FDA approval and commercial
use of Procellera and Optune, additional exploration by indepen-
dent groups is warranted to increase adoption. Clinical readouts
from the TTFields/PD-1 combination trials should provide sup-
port for drug-device combinations in this space. For the opti-
mized application of EStim, the underlying mechanisms of cel-
lular responses require a better understanding, and there is a
need to standardize and improve therapeutic EStim protocols and
devices. [88]

[PAGE 6] 3.3. Organ Level Bioelectric Signaling
Communication at the organ level is mediated by electrical sig-
naling through peripheral nerves, which connect organs to both
the central nervous system and to other organs.[89] Organ level
BEMs aim to address dysfunction in such electric signaling and
nerve circuitry by utilizing electronic devices (e.g., implants or
wearables) to deliver corrective electric doses or fields targeting
specific molecular mechanisms.[90] In reality, BEMs lie on a con-
tinuum in terms of the specificity of their actions on target path-
ways, which is constantly evolving as the mechanisms of diseases
are being deciphered. However, we propose that they can be clas-
sified into two groups, "broad" and "precise," based on whether
the intervention alleviates the symptoms of the disease in a non-
specific manner or by specifically targeting the neural-molecular
pathways causing disease.

[PAGE 7] 3.3.1. Organ Level Broad BEMs
Broad BEMs include devices that deliver nontargeted electrical
pulses to alter nerve signaling and manage symptoms in chronic
conditions such as pain and tremor.[91] Broad BEMs have been
marketed for decades and have interchangeably been referred to
as neuromodulatory, neurostimulatory, or nerve stimulation de-
vices, reflecting their historic use to modulate neural function.
In many cases, broad BEMs block or stimulate with constant,
simple waveforms rather than modulating dynamically on the
millisecond scale, which is important for generating precise ther-
apeutic effects. Furthermore, for many of these interventions, the
mechanism of action (MoA) is unknown,[92] with mixed evidence
on effectiveness. [91] This subclass can be further divided based
on the disease impact and the amount of evidence needed for
approval and commercial use.
Examples of broad BEMs include, but are not limited to
(Figure 5a) transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation (TENS)
and spinal cord stimulation (SCS), which use low-voltage elec-
trical currents for pain relief by applying electric fields across
whole nerve areas; and deep brain stimulation (DBS) which ap-
plies mild pulses of electricity across whole brain regions to
regulate abnormal impulses and alleviate symptoms of Parkin-
son's disease and essential tremor.[91,93] These approaches acti-
vate nerves that contain anatomically overlapping cell popula-
tions related to multiple mechanisms and hence produce non-
selective effects. [89,93] In the USA, TENS devices are sold directly
to consumers and are cleared through the 510(k) pathway. This
requires only a comparable legally marketed class II device for
demonstration of "substantial equivalence." SCS and DBS de-
vices are approved via the PreMarket Approval pathway, which

[PAGE 8] requires clinical data to demonstrate a reasonable assurance of
safety and effectiveness.[94]
Cutting-edge developments in broad BEMs include “closed-
loop therapies" such as Saluda Medical's Evoke, which is the first
commercially available SCS system capable of instantaneously
reading, recording, and responding to evoked compound action
potentials to provide precise, continually optimized therapy for
chronic intractable pain of trunk and/or limbs;[96] and "appli-
cations to new diseases," such as Abbott receiving FDA Break-
through Device designation to explore use of DBS to manage se-
vere depression. [97]
The selective targeting of many broad BEMs is being actively
explored; however, this is often limited by disease mechanism
understanding and access to biomarkers of neural activity to in-
form targeting and titration of therapy dosage. In the case of DBS,
placement of electrodes at specific sites in the brain and current
injection methods have been explored as ways to target specific
neuronal populations but more evidence is needed to support the
precision of this approach.

[PAGE 8] 3.3.2. Organ Level Precise BEMs
Precise BEMs include devices that deliver "targeted" electrical
pulses to trigger specific biological mechanisms. This creates a
precision therapeutic effect and potentially minimizes side ef-
fects because of the localized nature of the intervention. As an
example, the inflammatory reflex, where neural information is
transmitted via the Vagus nerve, detects and responds to cу-
tokine production and inflammation to maintain immune sys-
tem homeostasis (Figure 5b). [95] Delivering targeted electrical
pulses along the Vagus nerve at specific locations modulates
this neural reflex, suppresses inflammatory cytokines, and re-
stores immune homeostasis. [98] Precisely targeting the inflam-
matory reflex is expected to be less immunosuppressive and safer
than systemic antiinflammatory molecules. [99] Precise BEMs
for inflammatory indications target various (auricular, cervical,
splenic, or pancreatic) branches of the Vagus nerve, which under-
pin biological circuits that control inflammation and cytokine ex-
pression in chronic autoimmune diseases. For example, SetPoint
Medical Inc. is conducting a stage 2 pilot study in RA and a proof
of concept (POC) study in Crohn's disease under an FDA break-
through designation[12,100] and Galvani bioelectronics are carry-
ing out a POC study in RA targeting the splenic nerve. [101]
Precise BEMs can also be used to electrically stimulate cardio-
vascular reflexes. Examples include targeting the blood-pressure-
sensitive baroreflex to treat hypertension (Kyushu University)[102]
and heart failure (CVRx).[11,103]
In parallel to generating data supporting the effectiveness of
precise BEMs, manufacturers are innovating to improve and ex-
pand the application of these devices. Three of these innovations
include the following:


[PAGE 9] 1) Device Form and Function: Continuous optimization in minia-
turization (micro- or nano- scale devices), power source, inva-
siveness (minimally or noninvasive such as wearables), and
durability (newer biomaterials to improve longevity of device)
is underway.[104] Companies are also looking at new ways of
targeting nerves (optogenetics; ultrasound-mediated control
of neurons) and artificial intelligence (AI)-driven algorithms
for optimizing electrical dosing. For example, Parasym and
CardiaCare are investigating wearable electroceuticals stimu-
lating either the auricular branch of the Vagus, or secondary
projections to the Vagus-innervated brain regions via the me-
dian nerve, respectively, to make therapy more convenient for
patients.[103]
2) Sense and Respond Mechanisms: Most organ level BEMs stimu-
late only a single nerve or are open-loop therapies where they
stimulate specific targets with no direct feedback loop.[105]
In the medium term, we expect bimodal neuromodulation
stimulating two neural pathways simultaneously to be more
widely adopted in diseases where it is expected to be ben-
eficial, such as tinnitus. [106] In addition, the emergence of
sense-and-response devices, such as closed-loop neuromodu-
lators, is expected to circumvent the limitations of fixed-dose
therapies.[107]
3) New Targets: As our understanding of the nervous system
evolves via initiatives such as National Institutes of Health's
(NIH) Stimulating Peripheral Activity to Relieve Conditions
(SPARC), which is developing peripheral nerve maps, [108]
we expect electroceuticals to be applied beyond inflamma-
tory and cardiovascular diseases to challenging diseases such
as chronic cough, nephrotic syndrome, and endometriosis.
Companies such as BIOS Health may help accelerate this
progress by finding neural biomarkers allowing us to under-
stand and correct aberrant signals in real time. [109]

[PAGE 9] 3.3.3. Challenges
Organ level BEMs are sufficiently advanced to have received
some investment and partnering interest from pharmaceutical
companies,[7] but the level of activity is limited in comparison
to other therapeutic modalities. We suggest that the following
translational and clinical challenges, particularly those for pre-
cise BEMs should be addressed:
1) Incomplete Understanding of Disease Biology: Current applica-
tions for organ level BEMs are limited by our understand-
ing of neuronal control of diseases. For instance, in neuro-
pathic cough, it is unclear which nerve fibers are responsible
for the initiation versus suppression of cough. Alliances such
as SPARC are developing detailed anatomical and functional
maps for how peripheral nerves control organ function.[108]
Once we have a better understanding of neural anatomy, signal-
ing patterns in healthy versus diseased states, functional mech-
anisms, and translation between animal models and humans,
we can use this information to effectively target more diseases
using electroceuticals.
2) Incomplete Understanding of Mechanism of Action: The underly-
ing biology of how broad BEMs work is unclear, [92] although
we have a better understanding of the MoA of some precise
BEMs (e.g., stimulating the Vagus inflammatory reflex), as they
tend to rely on well-characterized innate autonomous or inflam-
matory reflexes. A more detailed understanding of neural MoA
is important to establish target validation and translational evi-
dence, which forms a large part of the preclinical packages re-
quired for clinical progression. Building a greater mechanistic
understanding of electroceuticals may increase the attractive-
ness of BEMs (and electroceuticals more broadly) and invite
further research into synergistic combinations of devices and
drugs.
3) Evidence Requirements and Controls: Organ-level BEMs are the
most advanced electroceutical category, with multiple precise
BEMs entering the clinic. To determine the true treatment ef-
fect of electroceuticals, clinical results need to be rigorously
compared between experimental and control groups (as op-
posed to a literature control). Otherwise, it becomes difficult to
interpret if the improvement in disease is due to natural remis-
sion, the Hawthorne effect or electrical stimulation; Hawthorne
effect is the alteration of behavior by the subjects of a study due
to their awareness of being observed. For wearable devices, trial
designs are further complicated by improper positioning of the
device by patients and the inability to effectively control the tri-
als, as patients can discern if they are in the treatment group by
the differential placement of the wearable device compared to
the control group. Therefore, trial designs need to acknowledge
these limitations and carefully refined to produce high-quality
data that could be used to show efficacy.
4) Distinguishing Therapeutic Effect and Safety Concerns: Varia-
tion in responses among patients receiving treatment is ex-
pected due to differences in patient subpopulations and the
amount of tailoring of stimulation parameters needed for effi-
cacy. For instance, initial clinical trials using Vagus nerve stim-
ulation for heart failure with reduced ejection fraction has had
mixed results. [110] Ardell et al. indicated that the difference in
clinical outcomes can be attributed to incorrect dosing proto-
cols of stimulation parameters (such as bipolar electrode ori-
entation, stimulation frequency, pulse width, and intensity) in
these studies. [111] This underscores the importance of better un-
derstanding and optimizing stimulation protocols as we move
from preclinical models to humans.[107,112] Furthermore, varia-
tions in stimulation parameters such as electrode position, volt-
age, frequency, and duration of electroceutical devices could
have a major impact on neuronal action potential and cause
damage to both neuronal and non-neuronal cells.[113] There-
fore, these parameters should be carefully assessed to mitigate
any safety concerns in the clinic. Key questions still to be an-
swered include the following: how big of a treatment effect can
we expect from precise BEMs and in which subsegments of pa-
tients? Are there predictive biomarkers of neural therapies that
can distinguish responders versus nonresponders? How do we
optimize treatment parameters and understand the potential
for tachyphylaxis or desensitization over time? How do we set
the parameters for safe administration of bioelectroceuticals?
Could further development of closed-loop systems and person-
alized digital twin enable better optimization of input stimula-
tion and output effect?[114]
In anticipation, there is optimism that if SetPoint's RESET-
RA clinical study replicates their prior successful studies[12] and
if Galvani's splenic stimulation study for RA has a favorable

23663987, 2024, 7, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adtp.202300344, Wiley Online Library on [02/08/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
1) Device Form and Function: Continuous optimization in minia-
turization (micro- or nano- scale devices), power source, inva-
siveness (minimally or noninvasive such as wearables), and
durability (newer biomaterials to improve longevity of device)
is underway.[104] Companies are also looking at new ways of
targeting nerves (optogenetics; ultrasound-mediated control
of neurons) and artificial intelligence (AI)-driven algorithms
for optimizing electrical dosing. For example, Parasym and
CardiaCare are investigating wearable electroceuticals stimu-
lating either the auricular branch of the Vagus, or secondary
projections to the Vagus-innervated brain regions via the me-
dian nerve, respectively, to make therapy more convenient for
patients.[103]
2) Sense and Respond Mechanisms: Most organ level BEMs stimu-
late only a single nerve or are open-loop therapies where they
stimulate specific targets with no direct feedback loop.[105]
In the medium term, we expect bimodal neuromodulation
stimulating two neural pathways simultaneously to be more
widely adopted in diseases where it is expected to be ben-
eficial, such as tinnitus. [106] In addition, the emergence of
sense-and-response devices, such as closed-loop neuromodu-
lators, is expected to circumvent the limitations of fixed-dose
therapies.[107]
3) New Targets: As our understanding of the nervous system
evolves via initiatives such as National Institutes of Health's
(NIH) Stimulating Peripheral Activity to Relieve Conditions
(SPARC), which is developing peripheral nerve maps, [108]
we expect electroceuticals to be applied beyond inflamma-
tory and cardiovascular diseases to challenging diseases such
as chronic cough, nephrotic syndrome, and endometriosis.
Companies such as BIOS Health may help accelerate this
progress by finding neural biomarkers allowing us to under-
stand and correct aberrant signals in real time. [109]

[PAGE 9] 3.3.3. Challenges

Organ level BEMs are sufficiently advanced to have received
some investment and partnering interest from pharmaceutical
companies,[7] but the level of activity is limited in comparison
to other therapeutic modalities. We suggest that the following
translational and clinical challenges, particularly those for pre-
cise BEMs should be addressed:
1) Incomplete Understanding of Disease Biology: Current applica-
tions for organ level BEMs are limited by our understand-
ing of neuronal control of diseases. For instance, in neuro-
pathic cough, it is unclear which nerve fibers are responsible
for the initiation versus suppression of cough. Alliances such
as SPARC are developing detailed anatomical and functional
maps for how peripheral nerves control organ function.[108]
Once we have a better understanding of neural anatomy, signal-
ing patterns in healthy versus diseased states, functional mech-
anisms, and translation between animal models and humans,
we can use this information to effectively target more diseases
using electroceuticals.
2) Incomplete Understanding of Mechanism of Action: The underly-
ing biology of how broad BEMs work is unclear, [92] although
we have a better understanding of the MoA of some precise
BEMs (e.g., stimulating the Vagus inflammatory reflex), as they
tend to rely on well-characterized innate autonomous or inflam-
matory reflexes. A more detailed understanding of neural MoA
is important to establish target validation and translational evi-
dence, which forms a large part of the preclinical packages re-
quired for clinical progression. Building a greater mechanistic
understanding of electroceuticals may increase the attractive-
ness of BEMs (and electroceuticals more broadly) and invite
further research into synergistic combinations of devices and
drugs.
3) Evidence Requirements and Controls: Organ-level BEMs are the
most advanced electroceutical category, with multiple precise
BEMs entering the clinic. To determine the true treatment ef-
fect of electroceuticals, clinical results need to be rigorously
compared between experimental and control groups (as op-
posed to a literature control). Otherwise, it becomes difficult to
interpret if the improvement in disease is due to natural remis-
sion, the Hawthorne effect or electrical stimulation; Hawthorne
effect is the alteration of behavior by the subjects of a study due
to their awareness of being observed. For wearable devices, trial
designs are further complicated by improper positioning of the
device by patients and the inability to effectively control the tri-
als, as patients can discern if they are in the treatment group by
the differential placement of the wearable device compared to
the control group. Therefore, trial designs need to acknowledge
these limitations and carefully refined to produce high-quality
data that could be used to show efficacy.
4) Distinguishing Therapeutic Effect and Safety Concerns: Varia-
tion in responses among patients receiving treatment is ex-
pected due to differences in patient subpopulations and the
amount of tailoring of stimulation parameters needed for effi-
cacy. For instance, initial clinical trials using Vagus nerve stim-
ulation for heart failure with reduced ejection fraction has had
mixed results. [110] Ardell et al. indicated that the difference in
clinical outcomes can be attributed to incorrect dosing proto-
cols of stimulation parameters (such as bipolar electrode ori-
entation, stimulation frequency, pulse width, and intensity) in
these studies. [111] This underscores the importance of better un-
derstanding and optimizing stimulation protocols as we move
from preclinical models to humans.[107,112] Furthermore, varia-
tions in stimulation parameters such as electrode position, volt-
age, frequency, and duration of electroceutical devices could
have a major impact on neuronal action potential and cause
damage to both neuronal and non-neuronal cells.[113] There-
fore, these parameters should be carefully assessed to mitigate
any safety concerns in the clinic. Key questions still to be an-
swered include the following: how big of a treatment effect can
we expect from precise BEMs and in which subsegments of pa-
tients? Are there predictive biomarkers of neural therapies that
can distinguish responders versus nonresponders? How do we
optimize treatment parameters and understand the potential
for tachyphylaxis or desensitization over time? How do we set
the parameters for safe administration of bioelectroceuticals?
Could further development of closed-loop systems and person-
alized digital twin enable better optimization of input stimula-
tion and output effect?[114]
In anticipation, there is optimism that if SetPoint's RESET-
RA clinical study replicates their prior successful studies[12] and
if Galvani's splenic stimulation study for RA has a favorable

[PAGE 10] 3.4. Systems Level Bioelectric Signaling

At the organism level, voltage gradients specify information such
as axial polarity, patterning, organ identity (shape and size)[117]
and play a vital role in embryonic development, remodeling, and
regeneration.[118,119] It has been argued that these system level
patterning outcomes are determined by a morphogenetic code
that encodes information at levels above the genetic and molecu-
lar codes and provides top-down instructions by regulating gene
expression and individual cell behaviors toward specific organ
level outcomes. [120] Bioelectricity is one layer of this complex mor-
phogenetic field and is uniquely tractable as a control mechanism
for large-scale changes because it underlies the medium in which
collective cell behaviors process information.
Foundational studies in planaria showed that the information
for cells to regenerate after damage is stored in a stable bioelectric
pattern, which can be pharmacologically rewritten to produce an-
imals that permanently regenerate with two heads (despite their
normal genome; Figure 6). [121,122] Similarly, exploiting the native
bioelectric pattern that normally regulates the pattern of the ver-
tebrate face [123,124] enables the induction of eyes in other tissues,
including regions that are not normally competent to form eyes
(such as the gut and lateral mesoderm).[125] Bioelectric proper-
ties also regulate proper tissue scaling and size in zebrafish fins
via potassium channels and calcineurin. [126-128] Exogenously ex-
pressed HCN2 ion channels can rescue nicotine-induced brain
patterning defects in Xenopus embryos via local and long-range
bioelectric signaling.[3,129]
Bioelectric signaling can be distinguished from traditional ion
channel biology in that it is not necessarily the manipulation of
individual ion channels that drives downstream responses but
rather the resultant change in spatial voltage gradients; the same
phenotypes can be obtained via modulation of a wide range of
channels, as long as the appropriate voltage distribution is in-
duced in the tissue. [125,130]
In addition to manipulating intrinsic electric signals, exoge-
nous EStim has also been shown to improve regeneration (es-
pecially nerves),[131] as it can mimic the biophysical processes of
regeneration observed in spontaneously regenerative vertebrate
species. [118] Daniel Cohen's lab has developed SCHEEPDOG
(Spatiotemporal Cellular HErding with Electrochemical Poten-
tials to Dynamically Orient Galvanotaxis); a next-gen electrobiore-
actor to dynamically program electrical cues and induce directed
and large-scale collective cell migration underlying key multicel-
lular processes such as morphogenesis and healing. [132,133]

[PAGE 10] 3.4.1. Challenges

Cracking the bioelectric code at the systems level and mapping
electrical properties to downstream changes in gene expression
and biomechanical properties has huge potential in developmen-
tal and regenerative biology. The main challenge with this field
is that this is still a nascent area of science that is being ex-
plored only by a handful of academic researchers. We do not fully

[PAGE 13] 4. Outlook

Of the four levels at which we propose that electroceuticals can
be considered, the most focus has been given to organ level bio-
electronic medicines. Regardless of this disparity, progress in all
fields will require collaboration by all players in the life science
ecosystem, including academia, innovators, biotech, pharma,
regulators, and healthcare systems. Table 2 outlines suggestions
to catalyze further innovation and translation for electroceutical
products.
We envision bright prospects for electroceuticals to efficiently
detect, treat a wide range of diseases, regenerate tissues, and or-
gans, and even alleviate the effects of aging[138] in the future. For
ultimate commercial viability, selecting diseases with high un-
met need where electroceuticals can demonstrate improved and
sustained efficacy and safety over current therapies while main-
taining patient convenience, patent life, scalability, and address-
ing pricing and reimbursement challenges all will be important.
For this vision to be realized, we need to better understand the
rules by which bioelectricity operates and encodes actionable in-
formation at various physiological levels as described in the on-
tology above and the relationship between them. Therefore, we
call for collaboration to deconvolute the molecular mechanisms
by which electroceuticals function as an urgent, next step to max-
imize the potential of this exciting field for the benefit of patients.

[PAGE 13] 4. Outlook

Of the four levels at which we propose that electroceuticals can be considered, the most focus has been given to organ level bioelectronic medicines. Regardless of this disparity, progress in all fields will require collaboration by all players in the life science ecosystem, including academia, innovators, biotech, pharma, regulators, and healthcare systems. Table 2 outlines suggestions to catalyze further innovation and translation for electroceutical products.

We envision bright prospects for electroceuticals to efficiently detect, treat a wide range of diseases, regenerate tissues, and organs, and even alleviate the effects of aging[138] in the future. For ultimate commercial viability, selecting diseases with high unmet need where electroceuticals can demonstrate improved and sustained efficacy and safety over current therapies while maintaining patient convenience, patent life, scalability, and addressing pricing and reimbursement challenges all will be important.

For this vision to be realized, we need to better understand the rules by which bioelectricity operates and encodes actionable information at various physiological levels as described in the ontology above and the relationship between them. Therefore, we call for collaboration to deconvolute the molecular mechanisms by which electroceuticals function as an urgent, next step to maximize the potential of this exciting field for the benefit of patients.


[PAGE 13] Acknowledgements

The authors thank Kevin J. Tracey, Yaakov Levine, Oliver Armitage for their review of the Bioelectronic Medicine section; Meera Swami and Hitesh Sanganee for help in reviewing and editing the full manuscript.


[PAGE 13] Conflict of Interest

S.B. and D.W. are employees of AstraZeneca. M.L. is co-founder of a company (Morphoceuticals) which seeks to induce regenerative repair via bioelectric approaches; his lab has a sponsored research agreement with Morphoceuticals.