Neurotransmitter signaling pathways required for
normal development in Xenopus laevis embryos:
a pharmacological survey screen
Kelly G. Sullivan and Michael Levin
Biology Department, Center for Regenerative and Developmental Biology, Tufts University, Medford, MA, USA

Abstract
Neurotransmitters are not only involved in brain function but are also important signaling molecules for many
diverse cell types. Neurotransmitters are widely conserved, from evolutionarily ancient organisms lacking
nervous systems through man. Here, results are reported from a loss- and gain-of-function survey, using
pharmacological modulators of several neurotransmitter pathways to examine possible roles for these pathways
in normal embryogenesis. Applying reagents targeting the glutamatergic, adrenergic and dopaminergic
pathways to embryos of Xenopus laevis from gastrulation to organogenesis stages, we observed and quantified
numerous malformations, including craniofacial defects, hyperpigmentation, muscle mispatterning and
miscoiling of the gut. These data implicate several key neurotransmitters in new embryonic patterning roles,
reveal novel earlier stages for processes involved in eye development, suggest new targets for subsequent
molecular-genetic investigation, and highlight the necessity for in-depth toxicology studies of psychoactive
compounds to which human embryos might be exposed during pregnancy.

[PAGE 1] Introduction
Although neurotransmitters are most often investigated for
their role relaying information throughout the nervous sys-
tem, they also participate as chemical messengers in many
signaling events of a non-neuronal nature (Lauder, 1988;
Entschladen et al. 2002; Levin et al. 2006; Dube & Amireault,
2007). Neurotransmitters precede the appearance of ner-
vous systems on both developmental and evolutionary time
scales. Classical neurotransmitters have been found in
oocytes and pre-nervous embryos of both vertebrates and
invertebrates, including mammals, amphibians, fish, insects
and echinoderms (Buznikov & Shmukler, 1981; Kusano et al.
1982). In addition, neurotransmitters are so evolutionarily
ancient that they are found in organisms outside the animal
kingdom. For example, acetylcholine is present in all king-
doms of life including fungi and bacteria (Horiuchi et al.
2003), and serotonin is present in plants (Levin et al. 2006;
Pelagio-Flores et al. 2011). It has thus been hypothesized
that the complex cognitive functions occurring in animal
brains, and partially mediated by neurotransmitters, evolved
from much simpler cell-cell signaling events responsible for
developmental patterning and maintenance of homeostasis
in primitive organisms (Buznikov & Shmukler, 1981).
Humans and other vertebrates express serotonergic,
glutamatergic, cholinergic and dopaminergic receptors in
non-neural tissues, where these receptors participate in a
variety of physiological events (Levin et al. 2006; Wessler &
Kirkpatrick, 2008; Bozic & Valdivielso, 2015; Tank & Lee
Wong, 2015). Most remarkably, complete neurotransmitter
systems containing not only receptors, but also machinery
for neurotransmitter synthesis and degradation, are present
in several somatic organs. For example, the kidney possesses
its own dopaminergic system that protects it from oxidative
stress and inflammation, and regulates sodium excretion
(Choi et al. 2015). In addition, the epidermis has cholinergic
and adrenergic systems that control cell growth, motility
and pigmentation (Grando et al. 2006), as well as a seroton-
ergic system responsible for a wide range of responses to
environmental rhythms and stresses (Slominski et al. 2003,
2005).

[PAGE 2] 
Perhaps most interestingly, neurotransmitters have been
shown to participate in embryonic development as well as
in maintenance of physiological states. They are best known
for organizing the developing mammalian brain (Nguyen
et al. 2001), but also act as important body-wide patterning
signals in a wide variety of animals. In the sea urchin
embryo, cleavage and gastrulation are, in part, regulated
by serotonin (Levin et al. 2006); a similar role was found for
serotonin in the fruit fly model (Colas et al. 1999a,b). In
addition, lipophilic analogs of serotonin, acetylcholine and
cannabinoids have been shown to rescue sea urchin
embryos from developmental defects induced by the amy-
loid protein fragments responsible for Alzheimer's disease
(Buznikov et al. 2008).
In vertebrates, several developmental roles of serotonin
are well documented. Serotonin regulates many different
aspects of bone development, including chondrogenic dif-
ferentiation (Bhasin et al. 2004), osteoblast proliferation
(Cray et al. 2014) and maintenance of bone mass (Ducy &
Karsenty, 2010). Serotonergic signaling is also an invaluable
regulator of craniofacial development, stimulating neural
crest cell migration (Moiseiwitsch & Lauder, 1995; Choi
et al. 1997), morphogenesis of the jaw joint and branchial
arches (Reisoli et al. 2010), skull ossification (Cray et al.
2014), formation of the teeth (Moiseiwitsch & Lauder,
1996), and organization of the retina (Reisoli et al. 2008). In
addition, it has been shown in both frog and chick that
serotonin acts as a very early signal in left-right patterning,
acting upstream of the earliest asymmetrically transcribed
genes (Fukumoto et al. 2005a,b; Carneiro et al. 2011; Beyer
et al. 2012; Vandenberg et al. 2012, 2014).
Although serotonin is well established as a player in ver-
tebrate embryonic development, the developmental func-
tions of other neurotransmitter families are yet to be
characterized. Information on involvement of neurotrans-
mitters in pattern formation would not only identify novel
components of embryogenesis, but also give important
insight into potential new endpoints for teratogenic (em-
bryotoxic) effects of widespread pharmaceuticals (Alwan
et al. 2007; Louik et al. 2007; Colvin et al. 2011; Myles et al.
2013; Hurault-Delarue et al. 2014; Yazdy et al. 2014). To
begin to identify possible patterning roles for other neuro-
transmitter families, this study took advantage of com-
pounds developed for neuropharmacological research, and
an exploratory drug screen was conducted in the Xenopus
laevis embryo, a popular vertebrate model for the study of
well-conserved developmental mechanisms (Kaltenbrun
et al. 2011; King et al. 2012; Ori et al. 2013; Pratt & Khakha-
lin, 2013; Schmitt et al. 2014), as well as for studies of devel-
opmental toxicology (Sunderman et al. 1991, 1992; Fort
et al. 1992; Mouche et al. 2011; Leconte & Mouche, 2013).
This preliminary screen represents the first tier of an inverse
drug screen, of the variety described by (Adams & Levin,
2006), in which drugs are tested in a hierarchical manner
according to target specificity, to rapidly bypass large
families with no apparent roles and progressively home in
on targets with interesting functions. Here, representative
pharmacological loss- and gain-of-function experiments
were presented using reagents targeting the glutamatergic,
adrenergic and dopaminergic systems indiscriminately (ex.
glutamate release inhibitor) or at the first level of receptor
categorization (ex. adrenergic β-agonist). This study specifi-
cally focused on reagents whose effects revealed true pat-
terning defects as opposed to simply generalized toxicity at
the cellular level. The results of this screen demonstrate that
neuroactive drugs, many of which are used clinically, are
capable of inducing a wide variety of craniofacial, pigmen-
tation, muscle and body axis abnormalities. These data
implicate several interesting targets for further pharmaco-
logical testing, as well as for future molecular-genetic
experiments and analysis of developmental marker
expression.


[PAGE 2] Materials and methods

Animal husbandry
Xenopus laevis eggs were fertilized in vitro and embryos were cul-
tured according to standard protocols (Sive et al. 2000) in 0.1 x
modified Mark's Ringer (MMR, pH 7.8) solution with 0.1% gen-
tamycin. Embryos were housed at 14-22 °C and staged according to
Nieuwkoop & Faber (1994). All experimental procedures involving
use of laboratory animals were approved by the Institutional Ani-
mal Care and Use Committee (IACUC) and Division of Laboratory
Animal Medicine at Tufts University, under protocol number
(M2014-79).

[PAGE 2] Pharmacological screen
All compounds were obtained from Tocris, with the exception of
propranolol, which was obtained from Sigma. Drugs were dissolved
in water or dimethylsulfoxide (DMSO; if water insoluble), aliquot-
ted and stored at -20 °C until use.
Embryos from three-four mothers were mixed and divided into
control (MMR) or experimental (MMR + drug at concentrations of
500 пм-500 μμ) groups. Doses were established for each drug on an
individual basis as follows. To establish an initial reference point for
dosing, literature using the drug in either a cell culture, syaptosome
Xenopus oocyte, or mammalian brain slice system was examined.
The dose was then adjusted upwards or downwards from the value
found in the literature, until a dose was reached at which embryos
displayed developmental phenotypes but no increase in mortality
or overt toxicity compared with controls. If drugs caused different
phenotypes at different doses, all such results were discussed. All
doses discussed were within about one order of magnitude of the
doses found in the literature: riluzole, 4 μμ (Westphalen & Hem-
mings, 2003); norketamine, 39 μμ (Ebert et al. 1997a); BAY 36-7620,
10 µm (Carroll et al. 2001); propranolol, 50 µm (Pan et al. 2015);
nicergoline, 10 μm (Caraci et al. 2005); cimaterol, 100 μм (Hu et al.
1988); and SCH 23390, 10 μμ (Szulczyk et al. 2012). Vehicle (DMSO
for water-insoluble compounds) levels never exceeded 0.5%, a level
that permits completely normal embryonic development. Water
was used as vehicle whenever possible. Drug exposures began at
gastrulation (Stages 10-11) and continued until Stage 45. If this
length of exposure was unable to produce any aberrant pheno-
types, an earlier exposure starting at cleavage was tested (2/4 cell-
Stage 45). At Stage 45, embryos were imaged on a Nikon (SMZ-
1500) microscope with a combination of incident light and transmit-
ted light that best highlighted anatomical features.

[PAGE 3] Statistics
At Stage 45, embryos were morphologically scored for craniofacial
defects (compressed head, microcephaly, indentation or projection
of nose), abnormal eye development (cyclopia, missing eyes, ectopic
retinal pigment epithelium (RPE), pigmented optic nerves, and
undersized or misshapen eyes), miscoiling of the gut and hyperpig-
mentation, via a Zeiss SV6 microscope. Hyperpigmentation was an
all-or-nothing phenotype (Blackiston et al. 2011; Lobikin et al.
2015) characterized by large numbers of ectopic melanocytes being
present around the eyes and in the peripheral regions of the head,
as well as increased melanocyte arborization and coverage of the
gut and tail. Occasional dead embryos and embryos lacking basic
body organization (such as exogastrulates) were considered unscor-
able and excluded from analysis. The incidences of unscorable
embryos did not differ between control and drug-treated groups.
Counts of normal and abnormal embryos in control and drug-trea-
ted groups were plotted on a 2 x 2 contingency table and statisti-
cally analyzed with Fisher's Exact Test, using GRAPHPAD software.
To further characterize the defects observed, five embryos per
dose of each drug were randomly selected, and a number of param-
eters describing craniofacial shape, pigmentation, body size and
body curvature were measured using IMAGEJ software. For visual
descriptions of these parameters, please see Fig. S1. These parame-
ters were then compared with those of five randomly-selected con-
trol embryos via the Mann-Whitney U-test. Basic dimensions of the
head included maximum width, length from posterior-most point
of the craniofacial skeleton to anterior-most point of the head, and
distance between the eyes (as defined by the proximal-most exten-
sion of RPE toward the midline). Parameters of facial shape
included length: width ratio, anterior projection of the nose
(length of a line running perpendicularly from the imaginary line
connecting the eye lenses to the anterior-most point of the face)
and eye ratio (distance between eyes: max head width).
In addition to quantifying craniofacial size and shape, a variety
of parameters were also used to describe overall body size and cur-
vature. Two different types of body length measurement were
taken: 'straight' length and 'string' length. Straight length is
defined as the length of a straight line extending from the ante-
rior-most point of the head to the tip of the tail. String length is
the length of a line that extends from the anterior-most point of
the head to the tip of the tail, passing through the muscular por-
tion of the tail and bending with the animal. Curvature of the ani-
mal was quantified by calculating the ratio of straight length to
string length. Perfectly straight animals have a string: straight ratio
of 1, and lower ratio values signify increased curvature. For straight
drug-treated animals and their respective controls, straight length
was the primary metric used to describe overall body size. For
curved animals and their respective controls, however, string length
was a more accurate indicator of the animals' body size.
Finally, for drugs that caused hyperpigmentation, gut and tail
melanocytes were quantified on digital images using the cell coun-
ter function of IMAGEJ. Animals in the images were anesthetized
with tricaine (MS-222), which contracts pigment granules and
allows discrete pigmented cells to be counted unambiguously.
Areas in which melanocytes were counted were defined using a
standard-size area in Adobe Photoshop. In the gut, melanocytes
were counted within a circle whose diameter was 350 pixels. In the
tail, melanocytes were counted within a 350 x 200 pixel box
extending posteriorly from the cloaca, whose bottom edge lined up
with the ventral-most edge of the tail muscles.

[PAGE 3] Whole-mount immunohistochemistry for muscle visu
alization
Control and drug-exposed embryos were killed at Stage 45 with tri-
caine (MS-222) and fixed in MEMFA [100 мм 3-(N morpholino)
propanesulfonic acid (pH 7.4), 2 тм ethylene-glycol tetraacetic acid,
1 мм MgSO4, 3.7% formaldehyde] for 2 h. Embryos were then
washed 3 x in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS), permeabilized at
room temperature in PBTr [PBS, 2 mg mL-¹ bovine serum albumin
(BSA), 0.1% Triton X-100] for 30 min, and blocked for 1 h at room
temperature with 10% goat serum in PBT (PBS, 2 mg mL-1 BSA,
0.1% Tween-20). Embryos were rocked overnight at 4 °C with
12/101 primary antibody (DHSB, 1: 100 dilution in blocking solu-
tion). Following primary exposure, embryos were washed 6 x in
PBT (1 h per wash) and blocked for 1h with 10% goat serum in
PBT. Embryos were then rocked overnight at 4 °C with AlexaFluor-
555 (1: 500 dilution in blocking solution). Following secondary incu-
bation, embryos were washed 6 x in PBT (1 h per wash) and imaged
on a Nikon (SMZ-1500) microscope.

[PAGE 3] Alcian Blue staining
Alcian Blue staining was performed on embryos with phenotypes in
which examination of craniofacial cartilages would be informative
for characterizing their specific defects. Embryos were continuously
exposed to drugs from gastrulation until Stage 45. They were then
washed 3 x in MMR. Embryos were then grown in MMR and fed
every other day with spirulina until they reached Stage 48 (except
for riluzole and Bay 36-7620, which were analyzed at Stage 45
because of viability problems at later stages.). Tadpoles were then
killed with an overdose of tricaine (MS-222) and fixed overnight in
MEMFA. Tadpoles were then stained in Alcian Blue according to
Pasqualetti et al. (2000) and imaged with a Nikon (SMZ-1500)
microscope.

[PAGE 3] Results
Riluzole
treatment caused hyperpigmentation,
edema, miscoiling of the gut and craniofacial defects
Riluzole is an anticonvulsive drug that increases y-aminobu-
tyric acid (GABA)-ergic signaling by blocking its reuptake,
and decreases glutamatergic signaling by inhibiting gluta-
mate release (Cifra et al. 2013). At all riluzole doses tested
(exposed from gastrula to Stage 45), over 90% of embryos
were hyperpigmented due to the presence of excess (in-
cluding ectopic) abnormally arborized melanocytes darken-
ing the gut, tail and peripheral regions of the head (Fig. 1).
The frequency of total developmental abnormalities in rilu-
zole-treated embryos (n = 54, 61 and 58 for 5, 33 and 50 μμ,
respectively) was significantly greater than in control (n =
55) embryos at all doses tested (P<0.01 for all doses).
Although riluzole caused a high occurrence of defects
regardless of dose, the frequencies of different sub-classes
of defects changed according to the dose tested, with the
exception of hyperpigmentation. In Xenopus, hyperpig-
mentation results from a neoplastic-like conversion of mela-
nocytes (Morokuma et al. 2008; Blackiston et al. 2011), and
in humans, can be a sign of systemic diseases resulting from
the dysregulation of endocrine or cell-cell signaling path-
ways (Speeckaert et al. 2014). Hyperpigmentation was not
observed at all in controls. Quantification of gut and tail
melanocytes revealed that embryos treated with 5 µm rilu-
zole had significantly larger populations of melanocytes in
these body areas than did controls (Table 1; P<0.02 for
gut, P<0.03 for tail). It is not yet known whether the
increased number of melanocytes in riluzole-treated tad-
poles is due to conversion of additional cell types into the
melanocyte lineage in ectopic locations, or overprolifera-
tion and migration of excess melanocytes away from their
endogenous locations.
Unlike hyperpigmentation, all other classes of defect
increased in a dose-dependent manner (Fig. 1b). Edema,
while not present in controls, was observed in 26% of
embryos treated with 5 µm riluzole. All embryos at the 33
and 50 µm doses exhibited pronounced pericardial edema
as well as swelling of the face. Miscoiling of the gut,
which is normally arranged in a spiral pattern, also
became more frequent as riluzole dose increased. While
only a small percentage (1-3%) of control and 5 μμ
embryos developed miscoiled guts, this defect was present
in 70% of embryos treated with 33 µm riluzole and 100%
of embryos treated with 50 µm riluzole. In addition, stain-
ing with skeletal muscle antibody 12/101 (Fig. 1a; Kintner
& Brockes, 1984) demonstrated that occurrence of muscle
defects increased in a dose-dependent manner. Disorgani-
zation of hypaxial muscles lining the gut was only
observed in 7.4% of control embryos (n = 27), while this
defect was present in 21.1% of 5 µm embryos (n = 19), all
33 μμ embryos (n = 26) and 96.6% of 50 μμ embryos (n =
29). Similarly, disruptions in the continuity of the interhy-
oideus muscle of the lower jaw were observed in only
3.7% of control embryos, while this defect was present in
5.3% of 5 μμ embryos, 11.5% of 33 μμ embryos and
34.5% of 50 μμ embryos.
Craniofacial anomalies were yet another class of defects
that varied according to dose of riluzole. Quantification of
craniofacial dimensions and Alcian blue staining reveal that
the facial morphology of embryos exposed to 5 µm riluzole
was indistinguishable from that of controls (Fig. 1a;
Table 1). However, embryos treated with 33 µm had signifi-
cantly squatter heads (Fig. 1a; Table 1). This is evident in
the shape of their craniofacial skeletons and confirmed by
their shorter head lengths (P<0.02), as well as their smaller
head length: head width (P<0.02) and head length : body
length ratios (P<0.02). All embryos treated with 50 µm had
a similar but more severe craniofacial morphology (Fig. 1a;
Table 1). Heads of 50 µm embryos were significantly smaller
than controls in both length (P<0.02) and width (P<0.02).
Their smaller head length : head width ratios (P = 0.09) indi-
cate that they were also noticeably squatter in shape.
Although the bodies of 50 μμ embryos were significantly
shorter than those of controls (P<0.05), their head length :
body length ratios (P<0.02) were also significantly smaller,
showing that their heads were, in fact, specifically com-
pressed on the A-P axis.
In addition to changes in facial shape and size, 76% of
embryos treated with 50 µm riluzole had a RPE defect char-
acterized by the thickening and pigmentation of connec-
tions between the eye and brain (Fig. 1b). This same defect
was never observed at frequencies over 4% in control

[PAGE 5] 
embryos or embryos treated with lower doses of drug.
Quantification of eye ratio (distance between eyes relative
to maximum head width) confirmed that the RPE of
embryos exposed to 50 µm riluzole extended significantly
closer to the midline than that of controls (Table 1; P<
0.02).

Norketamine altered patterning of the tail or eye,
depending on treatment start time

Norketamine is a dissociative anesthetic and N-methyl-D-
aspartate (NMDA) non-competitive inhibitor (Ebert et al.
1997b). Embryos were continuously exposed to norke-
tamine, starting at either cleavage (early exposure) or gas-
trulation (late exposure; Fig. 2a). Embryos exposed to 100
μ™ norketamine starting at gastrulation developed defects
at a significantly higher frequency than controls (P<0.01).
The most common defect observed in these late-exposure
embryos was a truncated tail on a rounded fin (Fig. 3b).
This defect was present in 45% of drug-treated embryos,
but was not observed at all in controls. There was no signif-
icant difference in the occurrence of eye defects between
controls and late exposure embryos.

Embryos treated with either 100 μμ (n = 94) or 200 μμ (η
= 71) norketamine during cleavage developed eye defects
(n = 87, P<0.01 for all doses). The eye defects observed in
norketamine-treated embryos could be divided into four
different and mutually exclusive categories. The first was
cyclopia, or the fusion of both eyes in the center of the
head to form one large eye. The second included defects of
the RPE, such as pigmentation of the optic nerves, or thick-
ening and pigmentation of the connection between the
eye and brain. The third category consisted of embryos
missing either one or both eyes. The final category con-
tained embryos with ocular defects that could not fit easily
into the previous three groups. These included embryos
with defects such as undersized or generally misshapen
eyes, as well as embryos possessing two different defects
simultaneously (Fig. 2c).

Both RPE and other defects were present at small per-
centages (<3%) in control embryos, and increased in a
dose-dependent manner (Fig. 2d). While only 2.3% of con-
trol embryos (n = 87) developed abnormal RPE, this class of
defects was observed in 26% of embryos treated with 100
µm and 30% of embryos treated with 200 μμ. Similarly, only
1% of control embryos developed defects that fell into the
'other' category, while such defects were present in 6.4%
and 11% of the 100 and 200 µm norketamine treatment
groups, respectively. Cyclopia and missing eyes were not
observed at all in controls. Cyclopia, however, was observed
in 2% of embryos treated with 100 µm norketamine and
21% of embryos treated with 200 µm. Interestingly, missing
eyes were observed in 11% of embryos treated with 100 μΜ
norketamine, but were not observed at all at 200 μμ
(Fig. 2d).

Treatment with BAY 36-7620 induced abnormal
patterning of the head, gut and tail

BAY 36-7620 (BAY) is a potent, non-competitive antagonist
of the mGlu1 receptor (Carroll et al. 2001). Embryos treated
with BAY from gastrulation until Stage 45 developed cran-
iofacial, gut and tail defects that increased in both
penetrance and severity according to the dose administered
(Fig. 2). At both 27 μμ (n = 57) and 40 μμ (n = 58), the occur-
rence of developmental abnormalities was significantly
higher than in control (n = 56) embryos (P<0.01).

Embryos treated with 27 μμ ΒAY developed permutations
of four different developmental abnormalities that were
apparent via gross morphological observation: a curved tail;
a compressed, rectangular head; pigmented optic nerves
(RPE defects); and a miscoiled gut (Fig. 3a). While the cran-
iofacial, gut and RPE defects did occur in control embryos,
they occurred at notably higher frequencies in BAY-treated
embryos (Fig. 3b). Miscoiled guts were only present in 5%
of control embryos, but were observed in 18% of embryos
administered 27 µм BAY. Similarly, one-third of BAY-treated
embryos had pigmented optic nerves, while RPE abnormali-
ties were only seen in < 5% of controls. Calculation of eye
ratio revealed that the RPE of BAY embryos did indeed
extend closer to the midline than that of controls (Table 2;
P<0.02). Most remarkably, only 2% of control embryos
developed misshapen faces, while craniofacial abnormali-
ties were observed in 46% of embryos treated with BAY.
Alcian blue staining showed that the craniofacial skeletons
of BAY embryos were notably reduced in size (Fig. 3a).
Quantification of craniofacial dimensions confirmed that
the heads of 27 µм embryos were significantly smaller than
those of controls in terms of both length (P<0.02) and
width (P<0.02). In addition, their smaller length: width
ratios (P<0.05) reveal that they were significantly squatter
in shape, while the smaller head length: body length ratios
(P<0.02) show that they were specifically compressed on
the A-P axis (Table 2). Interestingly, 23% of BAY-treated
embryos developed tails that curved along the dorso-ven-
tral axis, a defect that was not observed at all in controls
(Fig. 3b). Calculation of string length: straight length (cur-
vature) ratios confirmed that the bodies of BAY embryos
were indeed significantly more curved than those of con-
trols (Table 2; P<0.05).

A combination of different muscular defects was also
observed in embryos treated with 27 μμ BAY. Disorganized
hypaxial muscles were observed in 52.4% of BAY-treated
embryos, and disrupted continuity of the interhyoideus
muscle was present in 23.8% of BAY embryos (n = 21).
These same defects were only observed in 7.4% and 3.7%
of control embryos, respectively (n = 27). Another interest-
ing defect was observed in 23.8% of BAY embryos: nor-
mally stained hypaxial muscles but overall dim staining of
the craniofacial muscles (Fig. 3a). This defect was not
observed in controls.

At 40 μμ BAY (n = 58), all embryos developed a unique
phenotype consisting of a curved tail, microcephaly and an
uncoiled gut (Fig. 3a). No control embryos developed this
phenotype. Straight length: string length ratios confirm
that the bodies of 40 µm embryos were, in fact, significantly
more curved than those of controls (P<0.02; Table 2). In
addition, quantification of head dimensions (Table 2) con-
firmed that the heads of 40 μμ embryos were significantly
smaller than those of controls in terms of both length (P<
0.02) and width (P<0.02). Although the bodies of 40 μμ
embryos were significantly shorter than those of controls
(P<0.02), their head length: body length ratios revealed
that their heads were compressed on the A-P axis (P < 0.02).
Alcian blue staining revealed that 40 µm embryos lacked an
organized craniofacial skeleton. In addition, hypaxial mus-
cles were reduced and disorganized, and no muscle was
present in the heads of these embryos (Fig. 3a; n = 15).

Adrenergic antagonists induced abnormal patterning
of the head, gut and skeletal muscles

Propranolol is an antagonist of the ẞ-adrenergic receptor
(Wolter et al. 2014), and nicergoline is an a-adrenergic
antagonist (Alvarez-Guerra et al. 1999). Embryos treated
from gastrulation to Stage 45 with both nicergoline (n = 63,
CTRL n = 53) and propranolol (n = 60, CTRL n = 56) devel-
oped malformations at a significantly higher frequency

[PAGE 5] Developmental neurotransmitter drug screen, K. G. Sullivan and M. Levin 491
than control embryos (P<0.01 for both drugs). Embryos
treated with 100 µm propranolol developed a phenotype
that was 100% penetrant, consisting of a miscoiled gut and
a rectangular face (Fig. 4b,e,h). Alcian blue staining of pro-
pranolol-treated embryos revealed that all elements of their
cartilaginous craniofacial skeleton were reduced in size
compared with that of controls, and that the jaw formed a
pointed, triangular shape as opposed to the arched shape
of controls (Fig. 4n). Quantification of craniofacial dimen-
sions (Table 3) revealed that the heads of propranolol
embryos were significantly shorter (P<0.02) and narrower
(P<0.02) than those of controls. Although they had the
same head length: head width proportions (P = 1) as con-
trols, the anterior projection of their noses relative to head
length is significantly smaller than that of controls (P<
0.02). In addition, while the bodies of propranolol-exposed
embryos are significantly shorter than those of controls (P<
0.02), their head length: body length ratios are also notably
smaller (P = 0.09), suggesting that the heads of propranolol
embryos are somewhat compressed on the A-P axis
(Table 3).

In addition, 90% of propranolol-treated embryos were
hyperpigmented, with abnormally arborized melanocytes
darkening the gut, tail and peripheral regions of the
head (Fig. 4b,h). Quantification of gut (P<0.05) and tail (P
<0.02) melanocytes indicated that propranolol-exposed
embryos had significantly larger melanocyte populations in
these body areas than controls (Table 3). In addition, 50%
of embryos developed an RPE defect in which the inner side
of the eye was subtly pointed (Fig. 4h). Calculation of the
eye ratio revealed that the RPE of propranolol embryos did
indeed extend significantly closer to the midline than that
of controls (P<0.03; Table 3). Gut and RPE defects occurred
in <4% of control embryos, while hyperpigmentation and
craniofacial abnormalities were not observed at all.

Immunostaining with the skeletal muscle antibody 12/101
(Kintner & Brockes, 1984) revealed that propranolol treat-
ment also induced abnormal muscle patterning (Fig. 4k).
Notably, all propranolol-treated embryos (n = 33) had sev-
ere disorganization of the hypaxial muscles surrounding
the gut. In addition, continuity of the interhyoideus muscle
across the lower jaw was disrupted in ~24% of propranolol-
treated embryos. While all control embryos (n = 30) had
perfectly continuous interhyoideus muscles, partial and


[PAGE 6] Developmental neurotransmitter drug screen, K. G. Sullivan and M. Levin 492
complete discontinuities were observed in 13.3% and 10.7%
of propranolol-treated embryos, respectively.

Embryos treated with 33 µm nicergoline developed a pheno-
type consisting of a miscoiled gut and a rectangular head
(Fig. 4c,f,i). Alcian blue staining revealed that the craniofa-
cial skeletons of nicergoline-treated embryos were reduced
in size compared with those of controls, and that