Downloaded from https://www.pnas.org by 68.114.221.214 on August 2, 2025 from IP address 68.114.221.214.

Modulation of potassium channel function confers
a hyperproliferative invasive phenotype on
embryonic stem cells

Junji Morokuma*, Douglas Blackiston*, Dany S. Adams*, Guiscard Seebohm**, Barry Trimmers, and Michael Levin*1
*Center for Regenerative and Developmental Biology, Forsyth Institute, and Department of Developmental Biology, Harvard School of Dental Medicine,
140 The Fenway, Boston, MA 02115; Institute of Physiology I, University of Tubingen, 72076 Tubingen, Germany; Biochemistry I, Ruhr University Bochum,
44780 Bochum, Germany; and Department of Biology, Tufts University, Medford, MA 02155

Communicated by Clifford J. Tabin, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, August 22, 2008 (received for review February 5, 2008)

Ion transporters, and the resulting voltage gradients and electric
fields, have been implicated in embryonic development and re-
generation. These biophysical signals are key physiological aspects
of the microenvironment that epigenetically regulate stem and
tumor cell behavior. Here, we identify a previously unrecognized
function for KCNQ1, a potassium channel known to be involved in
human Romano-Ward and Jervell-Lange-Nielsen syndromes
when mutated. Misexpression of its modulatory wild-type β-
subunit XKCNE1 in the Xenopus embryo resulted in a striking
alteration of the behavior of one type of embryonic stem cell: the
pigment cell lineage of the neural crest. Depolarization of embry-
onic cells by misexpression of KCNE1 non-cell-autonomously in-
duced melanocytes to overproliferate, spread out, and become
highly invasive of blood vessels, liver, gut, and neural tube, leading
to a deeply hyperpigmented phenotype. This effect is mediated by
the up-regulation of Sox10 and Slug genes, thus linking alterations
in ion channel function to the control of migration, shape, and
mitosis rates during embryonic morphogenesis. Taken together,
these data identify a role for the KCNQ1 channel in regulating key
cell behaviors and reveal the molecular identity of a biophysical
switch, by means of which neoplastic-like properties can be con-
ferred upon a specific embryonic stem cell subpopulation.

cancer | ion channel | melanocyte | neural crest | KCNQ

[PAGE 1]
Embryonic stem cells' behavior is controlled in part by signals
from their cellular environment. It is now clear that ion currents,
electric fields, and endogenous voltage gradients are an endoge-
nous system for cellular communication (1, 2). Roles for bioelectric
signals have been uncovered in galvanotaxis of migratory cells,
mitotic regulation, and control of differentiation, as well as in
complex morphogenetic events, such as wound healing, limb de-
velopment, left-right patterning, neurogenesis, vertebrate tail re-
generation, and cancer (3-8).

Stem cells have distinguishing electrophysiological properties
(9-11) and express a variety of passive (12, 13) and active (14)
electrogenic transporters. Membrane hyperpolarization triggers,
and is required for, myogenin and MEF-2 expression in myoblast
differentiation (15), whereas direct electrical modulation of cells
can result in a dedifferentiation phenotype (16, 17), raising the
possibility that depolarization of cells may move them toward a
more primitive, stem-like state.

The functional significance of electrical signals for stem cells'
participation in complex morphogenetic events is largely mysteri-
ous. Likewise, the proximal transcriptional targets that link bioel-
ectrical events to changes in cell behavior remain unknown.
Progress in this fascinating field requires identification of both the
source and the downstream targets of ion flows in a well charac-
terized embryonic stem cell population. Neural crest cells differ-
entiate into a variety of cell types, including smooth muscle cells,
peripheral neurons, glia, craniofacial cartilage and bone, and en-
docrine and pigment cells, playing key roles in morphogenesis of the
face, heart, and other structures.

To contribute to basic developmental biology and regenerative
medicine (seeking novel ways to rationally modulate the position,
identity, and number of embryonic stem cells), we performed
molecular and pharmacological screens (18, 19) for ion flows that
regulate stem cell behavior during pattern formation. We uncov-
ered a role for a channel in neural crest regulation: KCNQ1/
KCNE1.

KCNQ1 (also known as KvLQT1 and Kv7.1) is a six-
transmembrane-region K+ channel. When coassembled with the
regulatory accessory subunit KCNE1 (also known as mink and
Isk), it forms the "slow delayed rectifier" (20, 21). Mutations in
KCNQ are responsible for an inherited birth defect that leads to
cardiac long-QT arrhythmia (22), and for the hearing loss observed
in Jervell and Lange-Nielsen Syndromes (23).

We showed recently that the KCNQ1/KCNE1 channel functions
in left-right patterning of early Xenopus embryos (24). Here, we
demonstrate that manipulation of this channel activity in Xenopus
embryos results in up-regulation of Xslug, and ultimately in a drastic
increase in melanocyte proliferation, cell shape change, and induc-
tion of invasiveness in these neural crest derivatives. In addressing
the control of embryonic stem cell behavior by ion transporters, our
data reveal a biophysical mechanism that confers a neoplastic-like
phenotype on a specific subpopulation of embryonic stem cells.

[PAGE 2] RESULTS
KCNE1 Misexpression Induces Hyperpigmentation. KCNQ1 but not
KCNE1 is normally expressed in the neural crest in Xenopus
embryos (SI Figs. S1 and S2). Microin-
jection of mRNA encoding wild-type KCNE1 into one-cell frog
embryos resulted in a striking hyperpigmentation observed in 32%
of KCNE1-injected larvae by stage 45 (Fig. 1). Misexpression of
other ion transporters, including Bir10, H,K-ATPase, ROMK, and
Mirp2, did not cause hyperpigmentation (n > 100 for each).
Quantification of melanocyte number and total melanin content
(Table 1) revealed a 2.1-fold increase in the number of pigment cells
per unit area after KCNE1 misexpression. However, KCNE1-
injected larvae had only 1.4-fold the melanin of control embryos,
demonstrating that the hyperpigmentation effect is not due to
greater pigment content per cell but is completely accounted for by
the increase in melanocyte number. This hyperproliferation of
melanocytes was not accompanied by general disruptions of mor-
phogenesis, twinning, or axial duplications; the KCNE1-
overexpressing larvae had normal dorsoanterior index, correct
length and proportions, and proper patterning of eyes, heart, and
face (n > 500; examples shown in Figs. 1 B and C and 4A, and Figs.
S3 and S8 A and B). We conclude that misexpression of KCNE1
specifically increases the production of melanocytes.

[PAGE 2] KCNE1 Misexpression Depolarizes Embryonic Cells by Inhibition of
KCNQ1. We next asked whether the effect of KCNE1 was mediated
by modulation of endogenous KCNQ1 channels. In many cell types,
including some neurons and nonexcitable tissues, KCNQ1 channels
help determine resting membrane potential (25, 26). The average
potential of Xenopus embryonic cells in the KCNQ1-expressing
region is -21.6 mV (Fig. S4A). This is similar to the transmembrane
potential in oocytes (-20 to -35 mV), allowing us to examine the
effects of KCNE1 expression on KCNQ1 currents directly by
electrophysiology. KCNQ1 expression in Xenopus oocytes resulted
in a rapidly activating, voltage-dependent, and K+-selective chan-
nel; this results in a hyperpolarization of the resting membrane
potential that can be rescued by inhibition with the KCNQ1 blocker
Chromanol 293B (Fig. S4 B-D). These data suggest that at resting
potentials similar to those found during neural crest induction,
KCNQ1 channels contribute significantly to membrane voltage.
Coexpression with KCNE1 reduced KCNQ1 currents at a wide
range of transmembrane potentials (Fig. 2A and Fig. S5). Biotiny-
lation Western blot analysis (Fig. 2B) supported a direct effect of
the KCNE1 protein on the KCNQ1 channel (not on localization of
channels to the plasma membrane). We conclude that coexpression
of KCNE1 inhibits the activity of the hyperpolarizing KCNQ1
independent of trafficking to the cell surface.

Exposure at stage 41 to Chromanol 293B, a specific blocker of
KCNQ1 (27), also resulted in hyperpigmentation (Fig. S3), consis-
tent with inhibition of KCNQ1 being responsible for hyperpigmen-
tation. The physiology data showing reduction of KCNQ1 currents
by KCNE1, together with the observation that the same embryonic
phenotype is obtained by direct KCNQ1 blockade as by KCNE1
misexpression, suggest that the induction of hyperpigmentation by
KCNE1 is mediated by reduction of KCNQ1 activity.

Consistent with this and with the inhibition of KCNQ1 function
by KCNE1, analysis using the fluorescent membrane voltage re-
porter dye DiSBAC (28) revealed that embryonic cells were
significantly depolarized by KCNE1 injection. Although it is not yet
possible to calibrate DiSBAC fluorescence changes to absolute
millivolt values, analysis of the data clearly showed (Fig. 2 C and D)
that transmembrane potential is significantly depolarized by
KCNE1 mRNA injection but not by injection of a control mRNA
(encoding an ion transporter that does not inhibit polarizing
currents). We conclude that the embryonic effects of KCNE1 are
likely to be mediated by its inhibitory effect on KCNQ1 activity and
the resulting cellular depolarization.


[PAGE 2] KCNE1 Expression Alters Proliferation, Migration, and Invasiveness of
Melanocytes. We then characterized the phenotype further, noting
that melanocytes not only were greater in number but also were
located in aberrant locations in the embryo. The ectopic melano-
cytes induced by KCNE1 exhibited a highly invasive character and
a spread-out dendritic morphology characteristic of many meta-
static cells. These cells colonized the neural tube, wrapping around
the spinal cord and sending processes into the dense neural tissue
(Fig. 3 A-B' and D). In contrast, the KCNQ1 opener drug RL-3
(29) caused 46% of the embryos to exhibit a lighter, hypopigmented
phenotype compared with controls (n = 28), the effect being
greater in the tail (Fig. S6 A and A'). The melanocytes continued
spreading across the epidermal layers and were particularly at-
tracted to ganglia, the gut, and organ primordia, colonizing them at
high density; sometimes, tissue outgrowths were observed, with a
presence of ectopic melanocytes in the center (Figs. S6 and S7).
Ectopic melanocytes also colonized the blood vessels (Fig. 3 E and
F), as observed in melanoma (30).

[PAGE 3] To analyze the proliferation phenotype, we characterized the
effect of KCNE1 by immunohistochemistry with an antibody to
phosphorylated histone 3B, a standard marker of cells in the G2/M
cell cycle transition (Table 2). The melanocyte-rich region in the
center of the flank had almost twice the number of mitotic cells in
KCNE1-injected larvae than in controls, indicating that the prolif-
erative increase conferred by KCNE1 lasts for at least 7 days past
induction of the neural crest. However, there was no significant
difference in the number of proliferative cells in the ventral flank
(largely devoid of melanocytes), indicating that KCNE1 misexpres-
sion does not induce a global (nonselective) up-regulation of mitotic
potential. Although we did not observe discrete tumors bearing
classical histoarchitecture changes indicative of cancer, taken to-
gether these data reveal a neoplastic-like phenotype conferred
upon individual melanocytes by the KCNE1 overexpression. This
phenotype includes a change in melanocyte shape (spread out with
extended processes), hyperproliferation, and aggressive invasion
into multiple deep tissues at significant distances from their source.

[PAGE 3] KCNE1 Induces Neural Crest/Tumor Regulator Gene Expression in a
Non-Cell-Autonomous Manner. We next used molecular markers to
examine how KCNE1 induces the coordinated changes in melano-
cyte behavior. Ectopic KCNE1 could be acting within the mela-
nocytes themselves or could provide cues to melanocytes when it is
expressed in other cell types. The hyperpigmentation could arise
from a normal melanoblast population being forced through more
rapid cell cycles, or through additional cells outside the normal
melanocyte lineage being converted to a pigment cell type (K+
transport modulation may exert effects mainly on cell cycle ma-
chinery or on lineage switches during embryonic differentiation).
Injections of XKCNE1 mRNA into dorsal, ventral, or vegetal
regions never (0%, n = 84) resulted in ectopic staining of the Xtrp-2
(31) melanocyte precursor marker (Fig S8 A and B). Thus, the
hyperproliferation phenotype does not arise from recruitment of
cells from alternative locations into the melanocyte lineage. How-
ever, ectopic melanocytes were often found in regions that had not
been themselves targeted by KCNE1 (e.g., dorsal head hyperpig-
mentation after injection of KCNE1 mRNA into ventral blas-
tomeres). This is likely due to colonization of these regions by
melanocytes that originate in KCNE1-positive areas, since mela-
nocytes are highly migratory (32). Analysis of a lineage label of cells
receiving KCNE1 mRNA (made possible by the mosaic expression
that results from mRNA injected at the one-cell stage) revealed the
non-cell-autonomous nature of this effect: the majority of ectopic
melanocytes had not themselves received the KCNE1 mRNA
(lineage label in Fig. 4 A and B).

Crucially, KCNE1 produced efficient ectopic induction of Sox10
(Fig. 4C), a regulator of neural crest progenitor specification into
the melanocyte lineage (33), and of Slug (Fig. 4D), a member of the
SNAIL family of zinc finger transcriptional repressors that controls
neural crest development and proliferation (33, 34). In contrast, a
number of control markers and determinants of other types of
embryonic structures (including OTX2, anterior specification;
XHE1, hatching gland; CG1, cement gland; and Pax6, eye field)
were not up-regulated in any of the embryos injected with KCNE1
(n > 41 in all cases). Thus, KCNE1 misexpression is able to
selectively alter the spatial expression of at least two important
regulators of neural crest lineages. Nevertheless, the dorsoanterior
development, craniofacial patterning, and marker expression in the
embryos and of the resulting larvae were normal, revealing that this
effect is not inducing major alterations of head or heart morpho-
genesis (as would be expected if large numbers of cells were diverted
from other neural crest lineages or if major and nonspecific changes
in signaling factor expression were being caused). These data reveal
that KCNE1 misexpression induces ectopic expression of powerful
regulators of both neural crest and neoplastic cell behavior (35–38).

[PAGE 3] DISCUSSION
Gain-of-function experiments have demonstrated that artificial
modulation of endogenous bioelectrical events can provide signals
altering morphogenesis and cell behavior in a coherent, spatially
instructive manner (2). It has been suggested that three-
dimensional systems of voltage gradients may be coordinates for
cell migration and morphogenesis (39, 40), and neural crest is
particularly sensitive to extracellular electrical cues (41). However,
in most cases the molecular details of these events remain unknown.

[PAGE 4] In particular, the least is known about how ion flows regulate
embryonic stem cell functions, and what downstream transcrip-
tional targets couple bioelectrical events to specific cell behaviors.
Our data identify KCNQ/KCNE1 complexes as a fascinating ex-
ample of the genetic underpinning of such biophysical signals.
Misexpression of wild-type KCNE1 induces a striking phenotype
caused by overproliferation of melanocytes. Other cell types may
have been affected, but the embryos exhibited very normal devel-
opment of most structures (including neural crest derivatives, such
as heart and craniofacial structures). Moreover, the proliferative
effect was not detected in melanocyte-poor regions of KCNE1-
injected larvae (Table 2). Thus, the phenotype is not a broad
misregulation of embryonic proliferation, migration, or differenti-
ation, but rather affects primarily one (or a small number) of
embryonic cell types.

Direct, specific pharmacological activation and blockade of
KCNQ1 by RL-3 and Chromanol 293B reduced and increased,
respectively, the pigmentation of larvae. Misexpression of MiRP2
(a regulatory subunit in the KCNE family that suppresses ERG
channels) or other K+ channel subunits did not induce hyperpig-
mentation. Thus, independent confirmation using molecular ge-
netic and pharmacological techniques implicates KCNQ1 as the
proximal target of KCNE1 misexpression and implicates KCNQ1
in the control of melanocyte behavior.

The data suggest an inhibitory role for KCNE1 on KCNQ1
activity. Our direct electrophysiology results show that although
KCNQ1 contributes significantly to membrane potential, coexpres-
sion of KCNE1 suppresses KCNQ1 channel currents (without
detectable alterations of KCNQ1 channel proteins at the plasma
membrane) and depolarizes embryonic cells in vivo. Misexpression
of MiRP2 (which does not inhibit KCNQ1 function at any potential)
does not induce hyperpigmentation. KCNE1's decrease of
KCNQ1's current at physiological potential explains why KCNE1
overexpression and KCNQ1 blockade affect melanocytes in the
same way; the reduction of KCNQ1 currents by KCNE1 expression
is also consistent with our direct observation of depolarization
induced by KCNE1. Given the known presence of voltage gradients
in embryos (42), it is clear that future efforts to understand control
of neural crest, and stem cell behavior in general, must take into
account membrane potentials and ion flows in these cells and their
niche. Importantly, although an association between depolarization
and up-regulation of proliferation has been suggested previously
(43), the induction of hyperproliferation by KCNE1-mediated
depolarization provides molecular evidence for a functional role of
membrane potential in mitotic regulation.

Marker analysis showed that the effect of KCNE1 is on the
endogenous set of melanocyte precursors and does not entail
conversion of cells from unrelated regions into melanocyte fate.
The normal craniofacial patterning and cardiovascular function
(two sensitive readouts) suggest that other neural crest derivatives
have not been diverted from their normal migration or respecified
into pigment cells by KCNE1. Rather than altering specification,
KCNE1 misexpression induces long-lasting increases in cell prolif-
eration rate and changes in cell shape. Because XSox10 and XSlug
are necessary and sufficient for the hyperproliferation of melano-
cytes (33, 44), the up-regulation of these targets by KCNE1
misexpression accounts for the observed phenotypes. Although it is
possible that other genes also were activated by the changes in
membrane potential, a global nonspecific effect is ruled out by the
normal development of the KCNE1-injected animals. The data
implicating up-regulation of Sox10 and Slug provide a unique
example of the identification of transcriptional target readouts of
non-cell-autonomous ion channel modulation effects and provide a
powerful model for studies to molecularly dissect steps leading from
depolarization to the activation of key transcription factors.

Our results suggest a model for the role of KCNE1 in modulating
the behavior of the melanocyte neural crest lineage during embry-
onic development (Fig. 5): expression of KCNE1 reduces KCNQ1
function, depolarizing cells and leading to the up-regulation of
XSox10 and its downstream targets, such as Xslug in neighboring
cells, inducing their proliferation and invasiveness.

[PAGE 4] This role for KCNQ1/KCNE1 in regulating cell proliferation may
have implications for cancer biology, since a number of "chan-
nelopathies" have been suggested to contribute to neoplasm (3, 45).
Significant correlations have been found between neoplastic po-
tential and bioelectrical properties of cells (45–49). These biophys-
ical properties are not simply markers but are functional signals;
misexpression of an ion transporter induces tumorigenicity in
fibroblasts (50), and inhibition of EAG channel function suppresses
neoplasm in an animal model in vivo (51). Ion channel function
controls the proliferation rate and invasiveness of a number of cell
types that often form tumors (49, 52-55), and overexpression of
KCNK9 (strongly overexpressed in breast cancer) promotes tumor
formation and confers resistance to hypoxia and serum deprivation
(56). Misexpression of KCNE1 did not induce tumors per se.
However, KCNE1 misexpression conferred several properties on
melanocytes that are strongly associated with cancer cells (e.g.,
melanoma; ref. 57): up-regulation of Sox10 and Slug, hyperprolif-
eration, increased dendricity, invasive colonization of a wide range
of organs and tissues (blood vessels and neural tube), and ectopic
growths. SLUG not only is a critical regulator of neural crest
development (44) but also has been implicated in the acquisition of
invasive behavior, increase of proliferation, and maintenance of
neoplastic phenotype during tumor progression (58).

It is unknown whether KCNE1-dependent mechanisms are
relevant to any clinical cancers. However, taken together, the five
phenotypes arising from KCNE1 expression demonstrate that
changes in bioelectrical signals can confer neoplastic-like properties
on a specific embryonic stem cell population. The results of late
Chromanol 293B exposure also show that mature neural crest cells
or their derivatives (not only early crest populations) can be affected
by K+ channel modulation. In light of the conservation of molecular
mechanisms, such as the Wnt and PTEN pathways in both stem cell
regulation and neoplasia, the idea has been put forward that some
cancers arise from misregulation of stem cell control (59-64).
Because of the known role of bioelectric properties in neoplasia and
the control of differentiation, proliferation, and migration in em-
bryonic and adult cells, it is tempting to speculate that KCNE1/
KCNQ1 is a biophysical environmental signal that shifts embryonic
stem cells toward a neoplasia-like behavior.


[PAGE 5] The ubiquitous use of bioelectric mechanisms across phyla
suggests that the KCNE1 phenotype may be of broad significance.
KCNE1 roles have not been directly tested in mammalian neural
crest function, although a microarray analysis (65) recently identi-
fied KCNQ1 as being up-regulated more than 3-fold in mice with
an increased number of neural progenitor cells. The high conser-
vation of Sox10/Slug signaling among vertebrates suggests that
overexpression of KCNE1 should be investigated as a possible
marker of (and a potentiating factor in) human metaplasia and
neural crest defects.

Bioelectric events are a poorly understood form of "epige-
netic" processes, which are of high significance in understanding
cellular controls (66, 67). Our data implicate a clinically relevant
ion channel protein in the orchestration of gene expression, cell
number, shape, and location during development. Understand-
ing the regulation of stem cell populations by the biophysical
properties of the plasma membrane and extracellular ion flows
will ultimately reveal novel markers and control points for
biomedical intervention.


[PAGE 5] METHODS
See SI Methods for additional details.

[PAGE 5] Fig. 5. A model of KCNQ1/KCNE1 function in embryogenesis. (A) A parsi-
monious model of the data proposes that KCNE1 modifies the function of
KCNQ1, which up-regulates Sox10 and its downstream targets, such as XSlug.
These factors are known to be necessary and sufficient for the observed
up-regulation of proliferation, change in cell shape, and induction of invasive
migration behavior in melanocytes. (B) Embryonic regions expressing KCNE1
induce up-regulation of key transcription factors, such as Sox10 and Slug, in
other cells in the neural crest population, which confers upon them a hyper-
proliferative, invasive phenotype. This illustrates a non-cell-autonomous
mechanism by which ion flows are transduced into canonical transcription
cascades that control cell behavior. Black dashed lines indicate migration of
hyperproliferating offspring of the target (green) cell. The original event
takes place in the cell expressing KCNE1 (blue), which does not itself contrib-
ute all of the proliferative offspring. The target cell may induce the XSox10
pathway in neighbors by conventional biochemical signals (e.g., BMPs, FGFs,
and WNTs). The direct biophysical interaction occurs in the target cell, where
KCNE1-mediated loss of membrane polarization is relayed to the downstream
signaling machinery by cell-autonomous mechanisms.
phenotypes arising from KCNE1 expression demonstrate that
changes in bioelectrical signals can confer neoplastic-like properties
on a specific embryonic stem cell population. The results of late
Chromanol 293B exposure also show that mature neural crest cells
or their derivatives (not only early crest populations) can be affected
by K+ channel modulation. In light of the conservation of molecular
mechanisms, such as the Wnt and PTEN pathways in both stem cell
regulation and neoplasia, the idea has been put forward that some
cancers arise from misregulation of stem cell control (59-64).
Because of the known role of bioelectric properties in neoplasia and
the control of differentiation, proliferation, and migration in em-
bryonic and adult cells, it is tempting to speculate that KCNE1/
KCNQ1 is a biophysical environmental signal that shifts embryonic
stem cells toward a neoplasia-like behavior.

The ubiquitous use of bioelectric mechanisms across phyla
suggests that the KCNE1 phenotype may be of broad significance.
KCNE1 roles have not been directly tested in mammalian neural
crest function, although a microarray analysis (65) recently identi-
fied KCNQ1 as being up-regulated more than 3-fold in mice with
an increased number of neural progenitor cells. The high conser-
vation of Sox10/Slug signaling among vertebrates suggests that
overexpression of KCNE1 should be investigated as a possible
marker of (and a potentiating factor in) human metaplasia and
neural crest defects.
Bioelectric events are a poorly understood form of "epige-
netic" processes, which are of high significance in understanding
cellular controls (66, 67). Our data implicate a clinically relevant
ion channel protein in the orchestration of gene expression, cell
number, shape, and location during development. Understand-
ing the regulation of stem cell populations by the biophysical
properties of the plasma membrane and extracellular ion flows
will ultimately reveal novel markers and control points for
biomedical intervention.

[PAGE 5] Methods
See SI Methods for additional details.

[PAGE 5] Expression Analysis. In situ hybridization was performed as in Harland (68) by
using clones (24) for KCNQ1 (EF07869) and KCNE1 (AF545500). Immunohisto-
chemistry was performed as in Levin (69) by using a polyclonal antibody to IsK (70)
at 1:1,000 and KCNQ1 antibodies generated by Invitrogen to peptide sequences
TYEQLNVPRMTQDNIS and ITHISELKEHHRAAIK (1:500).

[PAGE 5] Microinjection. Capped, synthetic mRNAs (~2.7 nl) were dissolved in water and
injected into embryos in 3% Ficoll. Results of injections are reported as percent-
age of otherwise normal embryos that were hyperpigmented, sample size (n),
and P values comparing treated groups to controls.

[PAGE 5] Electrophysiology. Whole-cell currents in Xenopus oocytes were recorded with
standard two-electrode voltage-clamp techniques. Data were acquired with
Clampex (PCLAMP 8.0, Axon Instruments) and analyzed with ClampFit (pCLAMP
8.0, Axon Instruments) and Origin 6.0 (Microcal). Whole-cell currents were re-
corded in ND96 solution (see SI Methods).

[PAGE 5] Imaging of Membrane Voltage Patterns by Using DiSBAC2(3). Fresh DiSBAC
(Molecular Probes) stocks (stock = 1 mg/ml in DMSO) were diluted 1:10 in distilled
water; that primary dilution then was diluted 1:1000 in 0.1× Modified Marc
Ringer's solution for a final concentration of 0.2 µM. Stage 20-24 embryos were
soaked in dye for 30 min. Embryos in solution were imaged using the TRITC cube
set on an Olympus BX61 microscope with an ORCA digital CCD camera
(Hamamatsu) with IPLabs software. Each embryo was brought into focus, the
milliseconds of exposure were set, and the image was taken. Before imaging the
next embryo, the contents of the Petri dish were swirled to ensure even distri-
bution of dye.
Images were segmented by hand such that the entire image of the embryo was
defined as the region of interest. IPLabs software then generated histograms of
the distribution of pixel intensities within the region of interest. Frequencies were
normalized to maximum frequency to correct for different numbers of pixels
measured. Intensities were converted from 0 to 4095 to 0 to 255 by IPLabs.
Because different exposures were required for different embryos, intensity val-
ues then were normalized to milliseconds of exposure. We characterized the
resulting distributions (histograms, see Fig. 2C) by comparing the mean width of
the first peak at half-maximum (Fig. 2D).

[PAGE 5] ACKNOWLEDGMENTS. We thank Punita Koustubhan and Amber Currier for
Xenopus husbandry; Dayong Qiu for general lab assistance; Drucilla Roberts for
help with pathohistology; Harry Witchel, Michael Sanguinetti, and Uwe Gerlach
for advice on KCNQ1 physiology and pharmacology; Michael Schwake for RL-3;
Jaques Barhanin for KCNE1 antibody; Naoto Ueno and Takamasa Yamamoto for
EST clones; Geoffrey Abbott for the MiRP2 clone; Roberto Mayor and Michael
Klymkowski for information on neural crest anatomy; Kelly McLaughlin, Wendy
Beane, and Laura Vandenberg for comments on the manuscript; Kristin Artinger,
Yun Kee, and Carole LaBonne for advice and in situ probe; and Peter Smith and
the BioCurrents Research Center for support and discussions. This work was
supported by grants to M.L. from the National Institutes of Health (R01-
GM07742), American Heart Association (0740088N), National Highway Traffic
Safety Administration (DTNH22-06-G-00001), and March of Dimes (6-FY04-65),
and by National Institutes of Health Grants 5T32DE007327-07 (to D.B.) and
5K22DE16633 (to D.S.A.).