[PAGE 1] COUPLING OF RATIONAL AGENTS TO QUANTUM PROCESSES

CROSS-REFERENCE TO RELATED APPLICATION

The present application claims priority to U.S. Provisional Patent Application Ser. No. 61/389,483 filed Oct. 4, 2010, which is hereby incorporated by reference in its entirety.

[PAGE 1] FIELD OF THE INVENTION

The present invention provides devices, methods, and systems for coupling a rational agent to a quantum process. In particular, the present invention provides rational agents configured to influence a quantum process, or to derive information from a quantum process, and methods and uses thereof.

[PAGE 1] BACKGROUND OF THE INVENTION

The fields of cognitive science, neurobiology, and artificial intelligence (AI) have long sought an answer to the question of how conscious thoughts and intentional desires control a body embedded in the physical world. This is the mind-body problem: how does conscious Will affect the quantum processes controlling neuronal activity in the brain (e.g. synaptic vesicle release, etc.) to produce behavior consistent with the intent? Because the macroscopic world is deterministic, the model necessarily posits that a Mind can interact with matter, without violating conservation of energy principles, only by manipulating the fundamentally-random (acausal) processes at the level of quantum mechanics (Larmer, 1986; Morowitz, 1987; Penrose, 1996; herein incorporated by reference in their entireties). A model of this process has been developed wherein conscious intent not only affects the behavior of particles inside a brain, but also affects quantum events outside the brain (Herman and Walker, 1972; Jahn and Dunne, 1986; Jibu and Yasue, 1995; Schwartz et al., 2005; Stapp, 1993; Stapp, 1999; herein incorporated by reference in their entireties). Such experiments use a device known as a quantum random number generator (qRNG). A qRNG is a device that uses quantum-mechanical events, which are in principle unpredictable and thus not physically determined to produce a stream of random bits (e.g. a stream of 1's and 0's). It has been demonstrated that conscious intent of a human subject or animal can deviate the statistical distribution of the qRNG's output. An extensive body of work and statistical analysis demonstrate that a human or animal operator can deviate the output of a calibrated qRNG (e.g., cause it to produce more 1's than it otherwise would produce). (Franklin et al., 2005; Jahn et al., 1997; Peoch, 1988; Peoch, 1995; Schmidt, 1971; herein incorporated by reference in their entireties).

In quantum mechanics, wave function collapse (also called collapse of the state vector or reduction of the wave packet) is the phenomenon in which a wave function, initially in a superposition of several different possible eigenstates, appears to reduce to a single one of those states after interaction with an observer. It is the reduction of the physical possibilities into a single possibility as seen by an observer (J. von Neumann (1955). Mathematical Foundations of Quantum Mechanics. Princeton University Press; herein incorporated by reference in its entirety.). A branch of quantum mechanics posits that the consciousness of an observer is the demarcation line that precipitates collapse of the wave function, independent of any realist interpretation. Commonly known as "consciousness causes collapse", this interpretation of quantum mechanics states that observation by a conscious observer is what makes the wave function collapse. The interpretation identifies the non-linear probabilistic projection transformation that occurs during measurement with the selection of a definite state by a mind from the different possibilities that it could have in a quantum mechanical superposition. In other words, creatures' minds somehow cause microscopic-scale probabilities to become reality. Such an interpretation follows strict predictable laws it can be studied, and tamed (e.g., as inventions like CD players demonstrate) by appropriate technology, despite the lack of understanding of the mechanisms that underlie it (as is true for much of quantum mechanics).

In using human or animal subjects, the experimenter has very little control over the functioning of this complex intentional system (a biological mind-brain). Because of the ethical impossibility of making radical changes in human consciousness, and the lack of current knowledge about relevant aspects of brain/mind function, scientists have been unable to determine precisely what aspects of information processing, or other events, in their living subjects enable interfacing to quantum-mechanical processes in the real world. Moreover, because of these difficulties and the fundamental uniqueness of all biological forms (which prevents parallelizing the effect to increase its power because individual animals' influences cancel out and are not simply additive), useful applications of this effect have not been produced.

[PAGE 2] SUMMARY OF THE INVENTION

In some embodiments, the present invention provides systems comprising: (a) an amplified quantum process; and (b) an rational agent; wherein the rational agent is configured to make a selection between two or more choices; wherein the selection is at least partially based upon output from the amplified quantum process; and wherein the rational agent exerts intent on the amplified quantum process, thereby altering the output of the amplified quantum process. In some embodiments, the intent comprises intent to select a specific choice and/or a choice that produces a specific outcome. In some embodiments, the rational agent is capable of ranking the choices according to their desirability to the rational agent. In some embodiments, the intent of the rational agent increases the likelihood of the rational agent selecting a more desirable choice. In some embodiments, the rational agent is incapable of ranking choices according to their desirability. In some embodiments, the intent of the rational agent increases the likelihood of the artificial intelligence agent selecting a more desirable outcome. In some embodiments, the rational agent is selected from: a decision-making computer program; virtual ecology; neural network; genetic algorithm; cellular automation; distributed agent system; optimization system; learning system; natural language processing engine; semantic processing system; probabilistic classifier; Boltzmann machine; a biological agent; or a ecological, social, economic, or cellular simulation system. In some embodiments, the amplified quantum process is selected from: biological systems, quantum random number generators, detectors of radioactivity, superconductive devices, amplifiers of quantum electronics effects, and systems that depend on many choices made by populations. In some embodiments, the output from the amplified quantum process is provided as a binary bitstream. In some embodiments, the rational agent is not an intact human or animal.  In some embodiments, the rational agent is capable of ranking choices and/or outcomes according to their desirability. In some embodiments, the rational agent is incapable of ranking choices and/or outcomes according to their desirability.


[PAGE 3] In some embodiments, the present invention provides methods of influencing a quantum process comprising: (a) providing: (i) a quantum process; and (ii) an rational agent, wherein the rational agent is dependent upon output of the quantum process to perform a task, and wherein the rational agent has intent to perform the task to achieve an outcome; (b) exerting the intent of the rational agent on the quantum process, wherein the intent of the rational agent influences the quantum process to provide output that will allow the rational agent to perform the task to achieve the outcome; (c) providing output from the quantum process to the rational agent; and (d) performing the task by the rational agent. In some embodiments, the output comprises two or more types of bits, and wherein the rational agent's performance at the task varies according to the type of bit provided to the rational agent. In some embodiments, the rational agent is aware of one or more of (i) which type of bit will result in the rational agent achieving the outcome, or (ii) which action will result in the rational agent achieving the outcome. In some embodiments, the rational agent is unaware of one or more of (i) which type of bit will allow the rational agent to achieve the outcome, or (ii) which action will result in the rational agent achieving the outcome. In some embodiments, the intent of the rational agent alters the output of the quantum process. In some embodiments, the quantum process is selected from: biological systems, quantum random number generators, detectors of radioactivity, superconductive devices, amplifiers of quantum electronics effects, and systems that depend on many choices made by populations. In some embodiments, the rational agent is not an intact human or animal.

[PAGE 4] In some embodiments, the present invention provides systems comprising: (a) an amplified quantum process; and (b) a rational agent, wherein the rational agent is not an intact human or animal; wherein the rational agent is configured to make a selection between two or more choices and the rational agent is unable to determine which of the choices is optimal; wherein the selection is at least partially based upon output from the amplified quantum process; wherein the goal-seeking agent exerts intent on the amplified quantum process; and wherein the amplified quantum process supplies the rational agent with output that increases the likelihood of the rational agent selecting the optimal choice. In some embodiments, the amplified quantum process supplies the rational agent with output that results in the rational agent selecting the optimal choice. In some embodiments, the output comprises two or more types of bits, and the choice is made by the rational agent based on the identity or pattern of bits supplied by the amplified quantum process. In some embodiments, the rational agent is unaware of one or more of (i) which type of bit or pattern of bits will result in the rational agent selecting the optimal choice, or (ii) which choice is the optimal choice. In some embodiments, the quantum process is selected from: biological systems, quantum random number generators, detectors of radioactivity, superconductive devices, amplifiers of quantum electronics effects, and systems that depend on many choices made by populations. In some embodiments, the rational agent is selected from: a decision-making

[PAGE 5] computer program; virtual ecology; neural network; genetic algorithm; cellular automation; distributed agent system; optimization system; learning system; natural language processing engine; semantic processing system; probabilistic classifier; Boltzmann machine; biological agent; or an ecological, social, economic, or cellular simulation system.

In some embodiments, the present invention provides methods for identifying agents capable of intent comprising: (a) providing: (i) a quantum process, wherein the quantum process produces a detectable output; (ii) a test agent, wherein the test agent is configured to depend upon the detectable output of the quantum process to make a decision between 2 or more outcomes; (b) allowing the test agent to receive the output from the quantum process wherein the test agent does not provide feedback to the quantum process; (c) detecting test output from the quantum process during and/or following decision making by the test agent; (d) comparing the test output from the quantum process with a control output; and (e) identifying the test agent as capable of intent if the test output differs from the control output. In some embodiments, the control output comprises output from the quantum process detected prior to and/or in the absence of decision making by the test agent. In some embodiments, the control output comprises output from a non-quantum process detected during and/or following decision making by the test agent. In some embodiments, the test agent comprises a decision-making computer program, virtual ecology, neural network, genetic algorithm, cellular automation, distributed agent system, optimization system, learning system, natural language processing engine, semantic processing system, probabilistic classifier, Boltzmann machine, or a simulation system; and wherein the quantum process is amplified or manifested by a random number generator, biological system, iterative process, cybernetic control network, the weather, or a market.

In some embodiments, the present invention provides a system comprising: (a) a quantum process; and (b) an artificial intelligence agent; wherein the artificial intelligence agent is configured to make a selection; wherein the selection is between two or more outcomes of variable desirability; wherein the selection is based upon output from the quantum process; and wherein the artificial intelligence agent exerts influence on the quantum process, thereby altering the output of the quantum process, and increasing the likelihood of the artificial intelligence agent selecting a more desirable outcome. In some embodiments, the output of a quantum process is an input for an artificial intelligence agent. In some embodiments, a quantum system is provided which depends on the outcome of a quantum-mechanical process. In some embodiments, the outcomes and/or decisions of the quantum system depend upon quantum-mechanical processes. In some embodiments, in the quantum system the outcome of a quantum-mechanical process is repeatedly amplified and presented as a stream of random digits. In some embodiments, the quantum-mechanical process is repeatedly amplified. In some embodiments, the quantum-mechanical process is presented as a stream of random digits (e.g., binary output, 1's and 0's, etc.). In some embodiments, the quantum-mechanical process is selected from a list consisting of one or more of: biological systems (e.g., cells, tissues, or organisms in which behavior can be modified by quantum effects), random number generators (e.g., qRNG), detectors of radioactivity, superconductive devices, devices that detect/amplify Johnson noise and other quantum electronics effects, and systems that depend on many choices made by large numbers of biological agents (e.g., population dynamics in animal populations, bacteria, or cultured cells, stock market, func-

[PAGE 6] tioning of neural networks, behavior of human subjects in situations such as driving, consumer decision-making (choosing among similar products), media consumption (e.g., selecting from among several equally probable viewing options on cable or internet websites), etc.). In some embodiments, the influence on a physical manifestation of a quantum process is observable when the system is poised among several equiprobable outcomes (or nearly equiprobable). In some embodiments, when there is a strong internal preference for one outcome, the influential effect on the physical manifestation of a quantum process is likely unobservable. In some embodiments, when outcomes are of roughly equal probability systems can be pushed towards one of those outcomes by very small "nudges" which are observable because the nudges result in a shift in the outcome. In some embodiments, the output from the quantum process is reported by a qRNG. In some embodiments, the qRNG output is a binary bitstream. In some embodiments, altering the output of the quantum process increases the likelihood of the artificial intelligence agent selecting the most desirable outcome. In some embodiments, the artificial intelligence agent comprises the intent to achieve more desirable outcomes. In some embodiments, the quantum mechanical process is manifested by a biological system. In some embodiments, the biological system comprises a human, an animal, a group of organisms, an in vitro homeostatic biological system, a plant, bacteria, or a fungus. In some embodiments, the artificial intelligence agent comprises a device, system, software, hardware, and/or process. In some embodiments, the artificial intelligence agent comprises a decision-making computer program; virtual ecology; neural network; genetic algorithm; cellular automation; distributed agent system; optimization system; learning system; natural language processing engine; semantic processing system; probabilistic classifier; Boltzmann machine; or an ecological, social, economic, or cellular simulation system. In

[PAGE 7] some embodiments, the algorithm performs different actions and/or makes decisions depending on input from a random bitstream (e.g., quantum bitstream, not pseudo-random). In some embodiments, the algorithm is selected from a list consisting of one or more of: games, optimization tasks, sorting, detection algorithms, cryptography algorithms, real-time process control algorithms, algorithms that solve specific equations, parameter fitting tasks, feature extraction and identification algorithms, and any useful computation where decisions need to be made.

In some embodiments, the present invention provides a system comprising a component that acts according to an algorithm and a quantum process, wherein the algorithm is dependent upon the quantum process for input to make a decision (e.g., repeated decisions). In some embodiments, when the algorithm (or algorithm-dependent component) must make the decision, a bit is obtained by amplifying a quantum process (e.g., biologically or electronically) into an observable outcome. In some embodiments, the observable outcome is displayed as, or converted into, a 0 or 1. In some embodiments, the algorithm (or algorithm-dependent component) selects between possible choices based on the bit provided by or drawn from the quantum process. In some embodiments, the algorithm (or algorithm-dependent component) uses the bit obtained from the quantum process to provide a better-than-average performance where otherwise a random choice would have been made. In some embodiments, the bit is used to force the algorithm (or algorithm-

[PAGE 8] dependent component) to make the known best decision (or conversely a known sub-optimal decision) generating an intention on the part of the algorithm (or algorithm-dependent component) to push the bitstream towards bits that allow it to use the best (or sub-optimal) options. In some embodiments, the output of the quantum process (e.g., bitstream) is deviated away from the statistically-expected random outcome by its use by the algorithm (or algorithm-dependent component). In some embodiments, the output of the quantum process (e.g., bitstream) is deviated away from the statistically-expected random outcome by the intention of the algorithm (or algorithm-dependent component). In embodiments in which the quantum process arises from a physical process (e.g., behavior of a dynamical or living system), the physical process is deviated along with the underlying quantum process (e.g., in accordance with the intention being exerted on the bitstream).

In some embodiments, the present invention provides a method of influencing a quantum bitstream comprising: (a) providing: (i) a quantum bitstream; and (ii) an artificial intelligence agent, wherein the artificial intelligence agent makes decisions between multiple outcomes of varying desirability to the artificial intelligence agent; and wherein the decision making is based in part on the quantum bitstream; (b) allowing the artificial intelligence agent to make decisions between the outcomes based on the quantum bitstream. In some embodiments, the method further comprises (c) detecting changes in the quantum bitstream during or following the decision making. In some embodiments, the quantum bitstream comprises and/or is observed by the artificial intelligence agent as a binary time series. In some embodiments, the artificial intelligence agent comprises an algorithm. In some embodiments, the algorithm is performed on a digital device and/or computer. In some embodiments, the algorithm is implemented as an analog device. In some embodiments, the algorithm performs differ-

[PAGE 9] ent actions and/or makes decisions depending on input from a random bitstream (e.g., quantum bitstream, not pseudo-random). In some embodiments, the algorithm is selected from a list consisting of one or more of: games, optimization tasks, sorting, detection algorithms, cryptography algorithms, real-time process control algorithms, algorithms that solve specific equations, parameter fitting tasks, feature extraction and identification algorithms, and any useful computation where decisions need to be made.
In some embodiments, the present invention provides a system comprising a component that acts according to an algorithm and a quantum process, wherein the algorithm is dependent upon the quantum process for input to make a decision (e.g., repeated decisions). In some embodiments, when the algorithm (or algorithm-dependent component) must make the decision, a bit is obtained by amplifying a quantum process (e.g., biologically or electronically) into an observable outcome. In some embodiments, the observable outcome is displayed as, or converted into, a 0 or 1. In some embodiments, the algorithm (or algorithm-dependent component) selects between possible choices based on the bit provided by or drawn from the quantum process. In some embodiments, the algorithm (or algorithm-dependent component) uses the bit obtained from the quantum process to provide a better-than-average performance where otherwise a random choice would have been made. In some embodiments, the bit is used to force the algorithm (or algorithm-dependent component) to make the known best deci-


sion (or conversely a known sub-optimal decision) generating an intention on the part of the algorithm (or algorithm-dependent component) to push the bitstream towards bits that allow it to use the best (or sub-optimal) options. In some embodiments, the output of the quantum process (e.g., bitstream) is deviated away from the statistically-expected random outcome by its use by the algorithm (or algorithm-dependent component). In some embodiments, the output of the quantum process (e.g., bitstream) is deviated away from the statistically-expected random outcome by the intention of the algorithm (or algorithm-dependent component). In embodiments in which the quantum process arises from a physical process (e.g., behavior of a dynamical or living system), the physical process is deviated along with the underlying quantum process (e.g., in accordance with the intention being exerted on the bitstream).
In some embodiments, desirability to an artificial intelligence agent is based on any suitable criteria. In some embodiments, desirability to an artificial intelligence agent includes one or more of: finishing a task correctly, finishing a task quickly, prolonging the time spent performing a task, being provided more difficult tasks to perform, being provided specific kinds of tasks, being allowed to interact with specific kinds of input data, being allowed to interact with other specific kinds of AIAs, having the opportunity to influence a real-world event (e.g., physical effector or output mechanism), processing more information, optimizing some process (e.g., virtual/simulated or physical), allowing more copies of itself to be made and executed, or having its memory/capacity/speed expanded, increasing/decreasing entropy of a specific process or data stream.

In some embodiments, the present invention provides a self-optimizing system, comprising: (a) providing: (i) a quantum bitstream; and (ii) an agent, wherein the agent performs a task, wherein the task can be performed at optimal or sub-optimal levels, wherein performance of the task is dependent upon output from the bitstream, and wherein the agent has the goal of performing the task well; (b) allowing the agent to perform the task, wherein, in performing the task, the agent exerts influence upon the bitstream to alter the output of the bitstream, thereby optimizing the performance of the agent.


[PAGE 9] DESCRIPTION OF THE DRAWINGS

FIG. 1 shows a schematic representation of an embodiment of the present invention in which an AIA exerts influence on a quantum process resulting in altered output from a physical process (e.g. qRNG).
This can be a qRNG device, a stochastic physical process, or anything that is (traffic cam, webcam, animal behavior analysis device, stock market data, etc.)
This can be a genetic algorithm search, neural network, game, language translation, or semantic inference engine—any AI application. In the below example, it's a chess player, but it can also be an artificial life system or agent in a virtual world.
For each move, make a list of all legal next moves.  If bit x=1, use Nth best move. If bit x=0, use Nth worst move (or vice-versa).
This includes basic statistics on bet substring distribution and other more sophisticated methods for detection of long-range order injected into random.
Statistical analysis of bitstream: deviating from random when chess is running?
Statistical analysis of AI process: did use of QRNG result in better performance?
Opponent (chess program or human, or deterministic or random move generator)
Data flow along USB bus
Quantum Random Number Generator (A)
Anomalous macrobehavior? (B)

[PAGE 4] FIG. 2
Bitstream source: hardware RNG, pre-recorded file, internet bitstream service, cellular or satellite communications bitstream, behavior of animals converted into bitstream
Phase 1 - collect bits
Phase 2 - run game, collect bits
Phase 3 - run game, collect and use bits
Phase 4 - run game, collect bits
Phase 5 - collect bits (repeats)
Operator queries (searches) database
EXCEL plots (effect size vs. parameters)
Data analysis for bitstreams: ENT and DIEHARD suites (compare properties of bitstreams for phases 1,5 vs. 2,4 vs. 3), same outcome analysis
Data analysis for experimental runs: reproducibility and effect size statistics
Backup

[PAGE 5] FIG. 3
Any computer-based program or agent
Deterministic computations
Stochastic component
Output
Quantum bitstream
Bitstream statistics are influenced by acausal (synchronicity-based) process

[PAGE 5] FIG. 7
#OF INDIVIDUALS IN 25 REPEAT EXPERIMENTS
Minimum: Quantum * Pseudo 8.636e-10 significant
Final: Quantum Pseudo 1.9376e-09 significant
Maximum: Quantum Pseudo 4.6958e-05 significant
Average: Quantum Pseudo 1.9728e-06 significant
Total (sum): Quantum Pseudo 2.6986e-06 significant
Tue May 18 09:48:47 EDT 2010 INFO: Entered
Debug Model: Yos
Headed?: No
Model Used: Ned.ogo/models/zero-sum-speed.logo
Intelligence feature: Os
ORLI Population: 5
PRUI Population: S
Grass-Grow-Rate: 50
Grass-Energy: 1


[PAGE 8A] FIG. 8A
Bit walk for Phase 2

[PAGE 8B] FIG. 8B
Bit walk for Phase 3

[PAGE 10] Animal positive control 1: a worm
FIG. 9
Small D. japonica worm
48 hour trial
Sequence of 20 minute rest cycles, 10 minute test cycles (96 of each)
Punishment ends after 300 ones are received from the byte stream
Shock is 0.1 seconds
2 seconds between polls of the RNG
Phase   Entropy   Mean   Percent Bit Flip   Chi2 P
pre      7.9802   127.8850   -0.001042   41.8744
test     7.9874   126.8776   -0.060764   <0.01
post     7.9877   128.2839   0.001713   61.2732
↑

[PAGE 11] Animal positive control 2: a tadpole
FIG. 10
8 min rest, 2 min test, 18 hours
Shocking every 0.1 sec
Lights were on for test, off for resting, off for pre & post
2 seconds between polls of the RNG
Need 120 1's to turn off shock
Expected by chance: 8.0 128.0 bits/byte (0.5 in 1 byte binary)
Phase   Entropy   Mean   Percent Bit Flip   Chi2 P
pre      7.9222   127.8921   -0.0013   89.2083
resting   7.9416   125.5954   -0.0463   38.6741
testing   7.9277   129.1549   0.0849   0.2596
post     7.9011   125.8606   -0.0073   11.6423
↑         ↑

[PAGE 11] FIG. 11B
Sample chromosome: Z = AX + K
GA Flowchart
Create initial design population
Evaluate obj. function of designs
Select and Reproduce (subisap ma)
Next Generation
Replace designs of the old population with new designs

[PAGE 11] FIG. 11C
FITNESS
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
Top
Average
30
40
GENERATION#

[PAGE 12A] FIG. 12A
Pre-Game Run   Game   Post-Game Run
Average performance at end: 0.935358   0.961439   0.934965
Pre-Game Run   Game   Post-Game Run
Average performance at end: 0.8023   0.8300   0.7829

[PAGE 14A] FIG. 14A
PRUI number vs 100 PRUI energy.... 0.50
PRUI number vs 100 PRULage........... 0.50
PRUI number vs 1 ongrass number... 0.50
PRUI number vs 100 QRUI number. 8.00
QRUI number vs 100 QRUI energy... 0.50
QRUI number vs 1.00 QRULage... 0.50
QRUI number vs 1xgrass number...... -1.00
PRUI energy vs 100 QRUI energy......... 0.00
PRUI ORUI
Number | Energy age Number Energy
33%
PRUI Number Energy
8.27 8.53 -0.21 -0.27 0.49
ORUL Number Energy
8.21 9.96 -0.29 8.49 8.06
grass 8.05
-1.00
100
1.00
100
8.00
8.00
-1.00

[PAGE 14] FIG. 14
B. Total # of individuals: Quantum, Pseudo
C. Summed age of individuals: Quantum, Pseudo

[PAGE 15] FIG. 15
Analysis of Entropy
Pre-Game (usb bits)
Pre-Game (rand bits)
Game (usb bits)
Game (rand bits)
Post-Game (usb bits)
Post-Game (rand bits)

[PAGE 16] FIG. 16
Analysis of Chi Sq Probability
Pre-Game (usb bits)
Pre-Game (rand bits)
Game (usb bits)
Game (rand bits)
Post-Game (usb bits)
Post-Game (rand bits)

[PAGE 17] FIG. 17
Bit walk for Phase 2 RNG bits not used
Bit walk for Phase 3 RNG bits used for GA
90% confidence

[PAGE 2] FIG. 18A
Bit walk for Phase 2

[PAGE 3] FIG. 18B
Bit walk for Phase 3

[PAGE 4] FIG. 19
Phase   No game, collect bits
Game, using bits
No game, collect bits
Expected by chance: 8.0 128.0 bits/byte (0.5 in 1 byte binary)


[PAGE 10] DEFINITIONS

As used herein, the terms "intelligent agent" ("IA"), "goal-seeking agent", and "rational agent" are used synonymously and refer to any cohesive system or entity that has preferences and/or directs its activity towards achieving goals. An IA, rational agent, or goal-seeking agent processes information and makes decisions based on their environment, whether virtual or physical. An IA, rational agent, or goal-seeking agent makes choices and/or performs actions that result in the optimal outcome for itself from among all feasible actions, according to the goals of the agent. IAs can also be viewed as dynamical systems that process information and attempt to maintain their state within a specific attractor in some appropriate state space. An intelligent agent may be a human or animal, a group of humans or animals, an in vitro homeostatic biological system (e.g. cells, tissues, or cultured organs), a hybrid (cybernetic) construct of bioengineering, an artificial intelligence agent (AIA), or a semi-artificial intelligent agent.
As used herein, the term "artificial intelligence agent" refers to a non-living device, process, or system capable of, or configured to, direct activities toward achieving goals (e.g. solving problems, achieving goal states, processing information, carrying out algorithmic computation, etc.). An AIA can be a purely-software system (e.g. an algorithm itself), a piece of hardware (e.g. robot, whether explicitly programmed or not), or a combined software-hardware system, possibly including biological components (as defined in the fields of Bioengineering, Synthetic Biology and Artificial Life).
As used herein, the term "semi-artificial intelligence agent" refers to an agent comprising a non-living process, device, or system coupled to a living organism (e.g. human, animal, etc.) or group of organisms (e.g. bacteria culture), wherein the coupled group is capable of, or configured to, direct activities toward achieving goals (e.g. solving problems, achieving goal states, etc.).
As used herein, the term "rationality" refers to the desire for more rather than less good, where "good" is defined as maximizing some quantity or condition. Rationality is manifest by any dynamical system (physically embodied or purely

[PAGE 11] simulated) that processes information in a manner directed at achieving goals, solving a problem, or optimizing performance.
As used herein, the term "influence" refers to the capacity or power of an entity (e.g. agent, process, person, animal, device, composition, etc.) to compel the actions, behaviors, and/or thoughts of a second entity. The first entity may force the actions of a second entity, or may cause some degree of deviation in the second entity's actions. The first entity may alter outcomes produced by the second entity.
As used herein, the term "intent" refers to the goals and/or desires of an intelligent agent. Humans and animals, as well as true artificial intelligence agents, exhibit "intent" to achieve their goals. The intelligent agent need not be aware of the existence of its "intent." Dynamical systems (whether physical or simulated) have intent to achieve particular goal states if their functioning is set up in such a way as to tend towards some attractor(s) in a particular state space. A system's intent may also be a homeostatic tendency to preserve its state or cohesiveness, or to maximize some specific quantity.
As used herein, the term "intact" refers to an entity, agent, or system that is complete or whole. For example, an "intact human" refers to a complete human being, not merely cells, tissues, or organs derived therefrom.

[PAGE 11] DETAILED DESCRIPTION OF THE INVENTION

The present invention provides systems, methods, and devices comprising an intelligent agent and a quantum process. The present invention provides devices, methods, and systems for coupling an intelligent agent to a quantum process. The present invention provides methods, devices, and systems for exerting influence on quantum systems, devices, or processes. In some embodiments, an intelligent agent influences and/or alters the output and/or behavior of a quantum process, or physical processes dependent thereon. The present invention is not limited to any particular mechanism of influencing a quantum process, and an understanding of the mechanism of action is not necessary to practice the present invention. In some embodiments, the present invention provides methods and systems wherein an intelligent agent (e.g. artificial intelligence agent or a biological system) exerts influence (e.g., through the intent of the IA) on a quantum process and/or system, or an amplifier thereof. In some embodiments, an intelligent agent derives information from a quantum process (e.g. bitstream). In some embodiments, the present invention provides artificial intelligence agents (AIAs) configured to influence a quantum process, and methods and uses thereof. In some embodiments, the present invention provides intelligent agents (e.g. AIAs) configured to influence a quantum bitstream, and methods and uses thereof. In some embodiments, the present invention provides intelligent agents (e.g. AIAs) which obtain an advantage in performing a task, answering a question, making a decision, choosing between options, selecting an outcome, etc. by deriving information from a quantum bitstream. In some embodiments, an AIA exerts influence on a quantum bitstream and derives information from the bitstream in order to solve a problem, perform a task, answer a question, make a decision, choose between options, select an outcome, etc. Many embodiments herein are described in terms of an AIA; however, a skilled artisan will understand that the embodiments described throughout also apply to other rational agents, systems and entities.
In some embodiments, the present invention provides a transformation of the intent of a rational agent into usable

[PAGE 12] information contained within a bitstream (e.g. in the form of alteration of the bitstream). In some embodiments, usable information contained within the bitstream is manifested as enhanced performance of the rational agent. In some embodiments, the present invention provides processes for transforming the intentions of a rational agent into enhanced performance of the rational agent. In some embodiments, the transformation of intention into enhanced performance occurs via influence on, and/or alteration of, quantum mechanical processes, or physical processes reliant upon quantum processes for function. In some embodiments, usable information from a bitstream coupled to a rational agent (e.g., AIA) is derived from a statistical analysis of the bitstream data. In some embodiments, the present invention alters the output of a physical process (e.g. a physical process which depends upon a quantum effect) in a measurable, detectable, and/or reportable manner.
In some embodiments, an intelligent agent (IA) is an artificial intelligence agent (AIA). In some embodiments, an IA (e.g. AIA) is capable of directing activities toward achieving a goal or goals. In some embodiments, an IA (e.g. AIA) is configured to direct activities toward achieving a goal and/or objective. In some embodiments, an IA (e.g. AIA) selects between multiple states (e.g. goal and non-goal states, states along a continuum of desirability, multiple goal and multiple lesser states, etc.) with the intent of selecting a more optimal state. In some embodiments, it is the intent of an IA (e.g. AIA) to achieve a goal state. In some embodiments, it is the intent of an IA (e.g. AIA) to achieve a more desirable state