[PAGE 1] Normalized Shape and Location of Perturbed Craniofacial Structures in the Xenopus Tadpole Reveal an Innate Ability to Achieve Correct Morphology

Background: Embryonic development can often adjust its morphogenetic processes to counteract external perturbation. The existence of self-monitoring responses during pattern formation is of considerable importance to the biomedicine of birth defects, but has not been quantitatively addressed. To understand the computational capabilities of biological tissues in a molecularly tractable model system, we induced craniofacial defects in *Xenopus* embryos, then tracked tadpoles with craniofacial deformities and used geometric morphometric techniques to characterize changes in the shape and position of the craniofacial structures. Results: Canonical variate analysis revealed that the shapes and relative positions of perturbed jaws and branchial arches were corrected during the first few months of tadpole development. Analysis of the relative movements of the anterior-most structures indicates that misplaced structures move along the anterior-posterior and left-right axes in ways that are significantly different from their normal movements. Conclusions: Our data suggest a model in which craniofacial structures use a measuring mechanism to assess and adjust their location relative to other local organs. Understanding the correction mechanisms at work in this system could lead to the better understanding of the adaptive decision-making capabilities of living tissues and suggest new approaches to correct birth defects in humans. *Developmental Dynamics* 241:863–878, 2012. © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

Key words: geometric morphometrics; canonical variate analysis; principle components analysis; H+-V-ATPase; neural crest; robustness

Key findings:
• Craniofacial perturbations in the *Xenopus* tadpole become normalized over time.
• The jaw and branchial arches achieve both normal position and morphology. Eyes, nose and otoliths achieve normal position but varying degrees of normal morphology.
• Two parameters, distance from the brain and angle from the midline, define normal position of craniofacial structures. Perturbed structures eventually achieve normal values for these parameters even though they start from abnormal initial conditions.
• These results shed light on the information processing and decision-making processes that underlie biological tissues' innate ability to repair deformities.


[PAGE 2] INTRODUCTION

A fundamental understanding of complex pattern formation (self-assembly of structures such as the eye, limb, or the entire bodyplan during embryogenesis or regeneration) requires more than pathway data on protein interactions and gene networks. It is also necessary to integrate those data into modular functions that explain higher-level topological properties such as anatomical polarity, size control, and symmetry. Achieving such understanding is a difficult task because large numbers of small, diverse building blocks (cells) must coordinate their individual activities to achieve geometric goals defined at the level of the whole system. At the same time, predictive control of biological systems composed of large numbers of heterogeneous active agents (cells in vivo) is a key goal of regenerative medicine.

Two approaches to understanding emergent behavior of large numbers of components have been highly successful outside of biology. In physics, "least action" principles describe a system's behavior in terms of maximizing (or minimizing) some well-defined quantity, such as entropy, energy, or symmetry. The resulting statistical mechanics deals with systems (e.g., gasses) as ensembles of lower-level units, giving rise to a mature science of thermodynamics and near-ubiquitously applicable concepts like entropy (Goodwin, 1964; Brooks and Wiley, 1988; Weber et al., 1988). In computer science, a system's behavior is described in terms of the data that a given information-processing algorithm uses to make decisions. In this approach, neither matter nor energy but information exchanged among black-box components is used as the perspective from which quantitative predictions of physical (Frieden, 1998; Siegfried, 2000) and social (Langton, 1995; Couzin, 2009; Deisboeck and Couzin, 2009) systems are derived.

Applying cybernetic paradigms to developmental biology requires that we formulate models of what quantities morphogenetic systems seek to maximize, and what information cells use to make decisions about their behavior. Unfortunately, there has been a dearth of quantitative data from which testable models of this type can be inferred. An especially fertile ground for developing novel approaches to large-scale patterning is the regulative nature of embryogenesis. It has long been known that in many species, developmental programs are not "hardcoded" (occurring in the same way regardless of circumstances) but in fact are able to correct for a large number of significant external perturbations. Thus they achieve the desired goal anatomy by initiating and modulating morphogenetic events that compensate for deviations from the normal progression of events by using a flexible, adaptive response to current state information. One example is the production of two complete (albeit smaller) animals when an early frog or mouse embryo is split in half. Another is the regeneration of a perfectly sized, placed, and oriented limb when a salamander's appendage is amputated in adulthood. A myriad of examples familiar to classical developmental and regenerative biologists show that patterning systems can detect damage (deviation from a predetermined target morphology), take steps to correct their pattern toward that goal state, and stop growth or rearrangements at the correct time. Indeed, this sometimes uses unnatural intermediate stages (Voskoboynik et al., 2007). For our understanding of these processes to aid in design of biomedical strategies, quantitative analysis of morphological responses to perturbations must nucleate predictive models of tissue behavior. We sought to establish a proof of principle approach using quantification of shape and shape changes during experimentally altered development in a genetically tractable model system, to derive hypotheses about what information tissues have and exchange, and what actions lead to normalization during complex pattern formation.

Congenital malformations of craniofacial structures comprise a significant class of birth defects with serious repercussions for affected individuals. Some conditions including cleft lip, cleft palate and micropthalmia affect more than 1 in every 600 births (Dolk et al., 2010). Both genetic and environmental factors contribute to these types of birth defects (Sant'Anna and Tosello, 2006; Hart and Hart, 2009; Brugmann et al., 2010) and many cannot be repaired with surgery (Saadeh et al., 2008). Fetal mice with mutations affecting craniofacial development have been successfully treated with pharmaceuticals that specifically modify expression of target genes implicated in craniofacial defects (Jones et al., 2008), suggesting that some patterning defects can be abrogated in the womb by targeted modulation of patterning processes. Such interventions require detailed understanding of the mechanisms that establish and maintain complex pattern in the embryonic face.

In vertebrates, cranial neural crest (CNC) cells contribute to the bones of the jaw, the teeth, and craniofacial cartilage. In frog embryos, a population of CNC cells migrates collectively out from the border of the neural plate, before neural tube closure, to form these craniofacial structures (Sadaghiani and Thiebaud, 1987; Mayor and Aybar, 2001). The signals necessary for the induction, specification, migration, and differentiation of these cells into the structures of the head and face have been well characterized (Basch et al., 2004; Alfandari et al., 2010; Theveneau and Mayor, 2011). Other structures of the face including the eye lens, olfactory bulb, and otic vesicle develop from cranial placodes—specialized regions of the ectoderm (Brugmann and Moody, 2005; Streit, 2007). The placodes originally form as thickened areas of the ectoderm that invaginate to produce the sensory organs. While neural crest and placodes develop in similar ways from similar cell populations, the placodes have a more restricted developmental potential and are significantly less migratory (Schlosser, 2006).

Although our descriptive knowledge of the normal embryonic differentiation of craniofacial structures is quite good, quantitative understanding of their remodeling under perturbation is largely lacking (Zambuzzi et al., 2009; Parsons et al., 2011). What deviations from the normal course of development can be sensed by this system, and what information do cells use in the repair process? One extremely powerful tool for analyzing craniofacial morphologies is geometric morphometrics of 2-dimensional and 3-dimensional images and structures (Singh, 2008). Geometric morphometric analysis involves the identification of landmarks on samples that mark discrete anatomical features; the alignment of landmarks using a mathematical algorithm that removes information about scale and rotation of specimens; and the use of multivariate statistics to study relationships among groups of samples (von Cramon-Taubadel et al., 2007). This analytical method has been applied to the study of craniofacial structures across human populations (Weisensee and Jantz, 2011), as a means to determine the effectiveness of treatments for craniofacial malformations (Singh et al., 2005), to diagnose craniofacial anomalies (Harris and Ross, 2008), to classify the effects of craniofacial toxicants (Klingenberg et al., 2010), to characterize long-range signaling in appendage regeneration (Mondia et al., 2011), and even to determine the age at which the human skull reaches fully formed adult features (Ross and Williams, 2010). Similar studies have also been performed on craniofacial structures of fish (Cooper et al., 2010; Suzuki et al., 2010; Parsons et al., 2011).


[PAGE 3] RESULTS

Perturbed Tadpole Faces Correct Their Anatomy Over Time

The first step to establish a model for analysis of shape robustness, self-monitoring, and repair of a complex multi-tissue organ system, is to quantify shape and shape change in such a system. We induced perturbations of the face of the *Xenopus* tadpole by injecting mRNA into only one cell at the two cell stage of development, thus generating tadpoles that have abnormal structures induced on only one side. Injection of mRNA encoding a dominant mutant form of ductin, subunit C of the H-V-ATPase, produces tadpoles with perturbed development of the eyes, jaws, branchial arches, nose, and otolith/otocyst (Vandenberg et al., 2011), but no systematic description of the patterning consequences of such changes has yet been attempted. To that end, we imaged affected tadpoles at several discrete periods after fertilization. Strikingly, as these tadpoles aged, the craniofacial perturbations (whether on the left, right, or both sides of the face) became less apparent over time, and relatively normal faces were constructed despite the deviations in initial states (Fig. 1).

The structures that appeared to achieve the most normal appearance over time were the branchial arches and the jaw, which both move and remodel to achieve a more normal appearance as the tadpole ages. Additional craniofacial structures including the eyes, olfactory pits (nostrils) and otolith/otocysts, were able to regain a more normal position, although these tissues never achieved a completely normalized morphology (Fig. 2). The effects on the eyes were most pronounced, with abnormal shapes rarely changing, even over months (Fig. 2A). Affected nostrils, including those originally formed connected to the eye, did achieve a more normalized placement, but their morphology remained somewhat abnormal with strands of ectopic tissue between the nose and eye (Fig. 2A). Tadpoles that were missing otoliths in their otocyst cavities never produced these absent structures (Fig. 2B), and ectopic structures were never resorbed into the tadpole (Fig. 2B). We conclude that the process of development is not hard-coded but is able to achieve morphological goal states adaptively, altering at least some multi-cellular structures' behavior to compensate for significant experimentally-induced malformations.

Morphometric Analysis Reveals a Convergence of Shape in Later Stage Tadpoles

Using the MorphoJ geometric morphometrics program, we analyzed the shape changes of various craniofacial structures on the dorsal and ventral sides of tadpoles at various ages. To quantify changes in the relative position of craniofacial structures at various ages in unaffected and affected tadpoles, we identified 12 landmarks on the dorsal side of imaged tadpoles and 20 landmarks on the ventral side (Fig. 3). Descriptions of these landmarks are included in the Methods section. The position of these landmarks, and the relative variance of the positions within treatment groups, reveal how perturbations to the left or right side of the face influence the position of each structure of interest.


[The consolidated text continues with the rest of the document, following the same principle of selecting the most complete and accurate version of each section while preserving page numbers associated with section headers.  Since the remaining text is largely consistent across extractions with minor formatting differences, simply appending the rest of Extraction 1 (which is the most complete in terms of page numbers) will suffice.]