Control flow in active inference systems
Chris Fieldsa Filippo Fabrocinib,c, Karl Fristond,e, James F. Glazebrookf,9,
Hananel Hazan", Michael Levinash and Antonino Marcianòi,j,k

March 6, 2023

Abstract
Living systems face both environmental complexity and limited access to free-energy re-
sources. Survival under these conditions requires a control system that can activate, or
deploy, available perception and action resources in a context specific way. We show here
that when systems are described as executing active inference driven by the free-energy
principle (and hence can be considered Bayesian prediction-error minimizers), their control
flow systems can always be represented as tensor networks (TNs). We show how TNs as
control systems can be implmented within the general framework of quantum topological
neural networks, and discuss the implications of these results for modeling biological sys-
tems at multiple scales.

Keywords
Bayesian mechanics; Dynamic attractor; Free-energy principle; Quantum reference frame;
Scale-free model; Topological quantum field theory

[PAGE 3] 1 Introduction
Living things offer remarkable examples of complex, multi-level control policies that guide
adaptive function at several scales. At the same time, they are made of components which
are usually thought of as physical objects obeying simple rules; how can these two per-
spectives be unified in a rigorous manner? The framework of active inference answers this
question be providing a completely general, scale-free formal framework for describing in-
teractions between physical systems in cognitive terms. It is based on the Free Energy
Principle (FEP), first introduced in neuroscience [1, 2, 3, 4, 5] before being extended to
living systems in general [6, 7, 8, 9] and then to all self-organizing systems [10, 11, 12, 13].

The FEP states that any system that interacts with its environment weakly enough to
maintain its identifiability over time 1) has a Markov blanket (MB) that separates its inter-
nal states from the states of its environment [14, 15, 16, 17, 18] and 2) behaves over time in
a way that asymptotically minimizes a variational free energy (VFE) measured at its MB.
Equivalently, the FEP states that any system with a non-equilibrium steady-state (NESS)
solution to its density dynamics (and hence an MB) will act so as to maintain its state in
the vicinity of its NESS. Any system compliant with the FEP can be described as engaging,
at all times, in active inference: a cyclic process in which the system observes its environ-
ment, updates its probabilistic “Bayesian beliefs" (i.e., posterior or conditional probability
densities) over future behaviors, and acts on its environment so as to test its predictions
and gain additional information. The internal dynamics of such a system can be described
as inverting a generative model (GM) of its environment that furnishes predictions of the
consequences of its actions on its MB.

As a fully-general principle, the FEP applies to all physical systems, not just to behav-
iorally interesting, plausibly cognitive systems, such as organisms or autonomous robots
[10]. Intuitively, behavior is interesting
to external observers and, we can assume, to
the behaving system itself - when it is complex, situation-appropriate, and robust in the
face of changing environmental conditions. Friston et al. [13] characterize interesting sys-
tems as "strange particles”, whose internal (i.e., cognitive) states are influenced by their
actions only via perceived environmental responses; such systems have to “ask questions"
of their environments in order to get answers [19]. Such systems, even bacteria and other
basal organisms [20, 21, 22, 23], have multiple ways of observing and acting upon their
environments and deploy these resources in context-sensitive ways. In operations-research
language, they exhibit situational awareness, i.e., awareness of the context of actions [24],
and deploy attention systems to manage the informational, thermodynamic, and metabolic
costs of maintaining such awareness [12, 22]. Situational awareness is dependent on both
short- and long-term memory, or more technically, on the period of time over which precise
[Bayesian] beliefs exist, sometimes referred to as the temporal depth or horizon of the GM
[20, 21]. Upper limits can, therefore, be placed on behavioral complexity by examining
the capacity and control of memory systems from the cellular scale [25] upwards. Liv-
ing systems from microbial mats to human societies employ stigmergic memories [22] and
hence have “extended minds”[26] in the sense of the literature on embodied, embedded,
enactive, extended, and affective (4EA) cognition [27, 28]. Such memories must be both
readable and writable; hence any system using them must have dedicated, memory-specific
perception-action capabilities.

Any system with multiple perception-action (or stimulus-response) capabilities requires a
control system that enables context-guided perception and action and precluding the con-
tinuous, simultaneous deployment of all available perception-action capabilities. Such self
organization entails the selection of a particular course of action – i.e., policy – from all
plausible policies entertained by the system's GM. In the active inference framework, the
system's internal states hence its GM can be read as encoding posterior probability
densities (i.e., Bayesian beliefs) over the causes of its sensory states, including, crucially, its
own actions. This leads to the notion of planning and control as inference [29, 30, 31], with
the ensuing selection of an action given by the most likely policy. In bacteria such as E.
coli, for example, mutual inhibition between gene regulatory networks (GRNs) for different
metabolic operons permit the expression of specific carbon-source (e.g., sugar) metabolism
pathways only when the target carbon source is detected in the environment [32]. The con-
trol of foraging behavior via chemotaxis employs a similar, in this case bistable, mechanism
[33]. Such mechanisms are active in multicellular morphogenesis, for example, in the head-
versus-tail morphology decision in planaria [34]. In the human brain, mutual inhibition
between competing visual processing streams is evident in binocular rivalry (switching be-
tween distinct scenes presented to left and right eyes) or in the changing interpretations of
ambiguous figures such as the Necker cube [35, 36]; similar competitive effects are observed
in other sensory pathways [37]. It also characterizes the competitive interaction between the
dorsal and ventral attention systems, which implement top-down and bottom-up targeting
of sensory resources, respectively [38]. It is invoked at a still larger scale in global workspace
models of conscious processing, in which incoming information streams must compete, with
each inhibiting the others, for “access to consciousness" [39, 40]. Mutual inhibition cre-
ates an energetic barrier that the control system that implements switching must expend
free-energy resources to overcome; the controller must not only turn "on" the preferred
system, but also turn “off” the inhibition. The required free energy expenditure in turn
induces hysteresis and hence the non-linear, winner-takes-all “switch" behavior in the time
regime. Such barriers and their temporal consequences persist in more complex control
systems whenever two perception-action capabilities are either functionally incompatible
or too expensive to deploy simultaneously.


Switching between perception-action capabilities can be regarded, from a theoretical, FEP
perspective, as selecting a plausible policy, or plan, supported by the GM. Technically, the
probability distribution over policies or plans can be computed from a free energy functional
expected under the posterior predictive density over possible outcomes, as described in §2.1
below. The control system that implements the switching process can be considered to
employ the GM to predict, or assign probability distribution to, each perception-action
capability (i.e., policy) as a function of context [41, 42]. We can consider the GM to
generate probabilistic “beliefs" about the consequences of actions, where here a “belief” is
just a mathematically-described structure, e.g., a classical conditional probability density
or a quantum state with an assigned amplitude. “Planning”or“control” can, therefore,
always be cast as inference – again in the basal sense of computation – implemented by
variational message passing or “belief propagation" on a (normal style) factor graph: a
graph with nodes corresponding to the factors of a probability distribution and undirected
edges corresponding to message-passing channels. Factor graphs can be combined with
message passing schemes, with the messages generally corresponding to sufficient statistics
of the factors in question, to provide an efficient computation of functions such as marginal
densities [43, 44]. Hence one can formalize control – under the FEP – in terms of control as
inference, which implies that there is a description of control in terms of message passing
on a factor graph. When the GM is over discrete states, this implies a description of control
in terms of tensor operators.

Nearly all simulations of planning under discrete state space GMs use the factor-
graph formalism. Crucially, the structure of the factor graph embodies the structure of the
GM and, effectively, the way that any system represents the (apparent causes of) data on
its MB; i.e., the way it “carves nature at its joints,” into states, objects and categorical
features. Under the (classical) FEP, the factors that constitute the nodes of the factor
graph correspond to the state-space factorization in a mean field approximation, as used
by physicists, or by statisticians to implement variational Bayesian (a.k.a., approximate
Bayesian) inference [45]. See [46] for technical details, [47] for an application to the brain,
and Supplementary Information, Table 1 for a list of selected applications.

We show in this paper that control flow in such systems can always be formally described
as a tensor network, a factorization of some overall tensor (i.e., high-dimensional matrix)
operator into multiple component tensor operators that are pairwise contracted on shared
degrees of freedom [48]. In particular, we show that the factorization conditions that allow
the construction of a TN are exactly the same as those that allow the identification of
distinct, mutually conditionally independent (in quantum terms, decoherent), sets of data
on the MB, and hence allow the identification of distinct “objects” or “features” in the en-
vironment. This equivalence allows the topological structures of TNs – many of which have
been well-characterized in applications of the TN formalism to other domains [48] – to be
employed as a classification of control structures in active inference systems; including cells,
organisms, and multi-organism communities. It allows, in particular, a principled approach
to the question of whether, and to what extent, a cognitive system can impose a decom-
positional or mereological (i.e., part-whole) structure on its environment. Such structures
naturally invoke a notion of locality, and hence of geometry. The geometry of spacetime
itself has been described as a particular TN a multiscale entanglement renormalization
ansatz (MERA) [49, 50, 51] – suggesting a deep link between control flow in systems capable
of observing spacetime (i.e., capable of implementing internal representations of spacetime)
and the deep structure of spacetime as a physical construct.


We begin in §2 by analyzing the control-flow problem in three different representations of
active inference. First, we employ the classical, statistical formulation of the FEP [10, 11]
in §2.1 to describe control flow as implementing discrete, probabilistic transitions between
dynamical attractors on a manifold of computational states. We then reformulate the
physical interaction in quantum information-theoretic terms in §2.2; in this formulation [12],

[PAGE 5] always be cast as inference – again in the basal sense of computation – implemented by
variational message passing or “belief propagation" on a (normal style) factor graph: a
graph with nodes corresponding to the factors of a probability distribution and undirected
edges corresponding to message-passing channels. Factor graphs can be combined with
message passing schemes, with the messages generally corresponding to sufficient statistics
of the factors in question, to provide an efficient computation of functions such as marginal
densities [43, 44]. Hence one can formalize control – under the FEP – in terms of control as
inference, which implies that there is a description of control in terms of message passing
on a factor graph. When the GM is over discrete states, this implies a description of control
in terms of tensor operators.

Nearly all simulations of planning under discrete state space GMs use the factor-
graph formalism. Crucially, the structure of the factor graph embodies the structure of the
GM and, effectively, the way that any system represents the (apparent causes of) data on
its MB; i.e., the way it “carves nature at its joints,” into states, objects and categorical
features. Under the (classical) FEP, the factors that constitute the nodes of the factor
graph correspond to the state-space factorization in a mean field approximation, as used
by physicists, or by statisticians to implement variational Bayesian (a.k.a., approximate
Bayesian) inference [45]. See [46] for technical details, [47] for an application to the brain,
and Supplementary Information, Table 1 for a list of selected applications.

We show in this paper that control flow in such systems can always be formally described
as a tensor network, a factorization of some overall tensor (i.e., high-dimensional matrix)
operator into multiple component tensor operators that are pairwise contracted on shared
degrees of freedom [48]. In particular, we show that the factorization conditions that allow
the construction of a TN are exactly the same as those that allow the identification of
distinct, mutually conditionally independent (in quantum terms, decoherent), sets of data
on the MB, and hence allow the identification of distinct “objects” or “features” in the en-
vironment. This equivalence allows the topological structures of TNs – many of which have
been well-characterized in applications of the TN formalism to other domains [48] – to be
employed as a classification of control structures in active inference systems; including cells,
organisms, and multi-organism communities. It allows, in particular, a principled approach
to the question of whether, and to what extent, a cognitive system can impose a decom-
positional or mereological (i.e., part-whole) structure on its environment. Such structures
naturally invoke a notion of locality, and hence of geometry. The geometry of spacetime
itself has been described as a particular TN a multiscale entanglement renormalization
ansatz (MERA) [49, 50, 51] – suggesting a deep link between control flow in systems capable
of observing spacetime (i.e., capable of implementing internal representations of spacetime)
and the deep structure of spacetime as a physical construct.

We begin in §2 by analyzing the control-flow problem in three different representations of
active inference. First, we employ the classical, statistical formulation of the FEP [10, 11]
in §2.1 to describe control flow as implementing discrete, probabilistic transitions between
dynamical attractors on a manifold of computational states. We then reformulate the
physical interaction in quantum information-theoretic terms in §2.2; in this formulation [12],

[PAGE 6] components of the GM can be considered to be distinct quantum reference frames (QRFs)
[52, 53] and represented by hierarchical networks of Barwise-Seligman classifiers [54] as
developed in [55, 56, 57, 58]. Control flow then implements discrete transitions between
QRFs. The third step, in §2.3, employs the mapping between hierarchies of classifiers
and topological quantum field theories (TQFTs) developed in [59]. Here, control flow
is implemented by a TQFT, with transition amplitudes given by a path integral. The
second and third of these representations provide formal characterizations of intrinsic (or
"quantum") context effects that are consistent with both the sheaf-theoretic treatment of
contextuality in [60, 61] and the Contextuality by Default (CbD) approach of [62, 63];
see also the discussion in [57] and [59, §7.2]. The underlying theme is that contextuality
arises due to the non-existence of any globally definable (maximally connected) conditional
probability distribution across all possible observations (see e.g., [64] for a review from a
more general physics perspective). Extending our earlier analysis [57], we discuss reasons
to expect that active inference systems will generically exhibit such context effects.

We then develop in §3 a fully-general tensor representation of control flow, and prove
that this tensor can be factored into a TN if, and only if, the separability (or conditional
statistical independence) conditions needed to identify distinct features of or objects in
the environment are met. We show how TN architecture allows classification of control
flows, and give two illustrative examples. We discuss in §4 several established relationships
between TNs and artificial neural network (ANN) architectures, and how these generalize
to topological quantum neural networks [59, 65], of which standard deep-learning (DL)
architectures are a classical limit [66]. We turn in §5 to implications of these results for
biology, and discuss how TN architectures correlate with the observational capabilities of
the system being modeled, particularly as regards abilities to detect spatial locality and
mereology. We consider how to classify known control pathways in terms of TN architecture
and how to employ the TN representation of control flow in experimental design. We
conclude by looking forward to how these FEP-based tools can further integrate the physical
and life sciences.

[PAGE 6] 2 Formal description of the control problem

[PAGE 6] 2.1 The attractor picture

Let U be a random dynamical system that can be decomposed into subsystems with states
μ(t), b(t), and n(t) such that the dependence of the μ(t) on the n(t), and vice-versa, is only
via the b(t). In this case, the b(t) form an MB separating the μ(t) from the n(t). We will refer
to the u(t) as “internal” states, to the n(t) as “environment” states, and to the combined
π(t) = (b(t), μ(t)) as "particular" (or "particle") states [10]. The FEP is a variational or
least-action principle stating that any system that interacts sufficiently weakly with its
environment can be considered to be enclosed by an MB, i.e. any“particle” with states
π(t) = (b(t), μ(t)), will evolve in a way that tends to minimize a variational free energy

[PAGE 7] (VFE) F(π) that is an upper bound on (Bayesian) surprisal. This free energy is effectively
the divergence between the variational density encoded by internal states and the density
over external states conditioned on the MB states. It can be written [10, Eq. 2.3],

F(π) = Eq(η) [ln qμ(η) – In p(η, b)]
=
Variational free energy
Eq[- In p(b|n) – In p(n)] - Eq [- In qμ(η)]
Energy constraint (likelihood & prior)
= DKL[qμ(η)|p(η)] – Eq[ln p(b|n)]
Complexity
Accuracy
Entropy
= DKL[qμ(η)||pn|b)] - lnp(b) ≥ − lnp(b)
Divergence
Log evidence
(1)

The VFE functional F(π) is an upper bound on surprisal (a.k.a. self-information) I(π) =
- lnp(π) > - ln p(b) because the Kullback-Leibler divergence term (DKL) is always non-
negative. This KL divergence is between the density over external states η, given the MB
state b, and a variational density Qμ(η) over external states parameterized by the internal
state μ. If we view the internal state μas encoding a posterior over the external staten,
minimizing VFE is, effectively, minimizing a prediction error, under a GM encoded by the
NESS density. In this treatment, the NESS density becomes a probabilistic specification
of the relationship between external or environmental states and particular (i.e., "self")
states. We can interpret the internal and active MB states in terms of active inference,
i.e., a Bayesian mechanics [11], in which their expected flow can be read as perception
and action, respectively. Here “active” states are a subset of the MB states that are not
influenced by environmental states and – for the kinds of particles considered here – do
not influence internal states. In other words, active inference is a process of Bayesian
belief updating that incorporates active exploration of the environment. It is one way
of interpreting a generalized synchrony between two random dynamical systems that are
coupled via an MB.

If the "particle" πis a biological cell, it is natural to consider the MB b to be implemented
by the cell membrane and the "internal" states µ to be the internal macromolecular or
biochemical states of the cell; indeed, it is this association that motivated the application of
the FEP to cellular life [5]. In this case, the NESS corresponds to the state, or neighborhood
of states, that maintain homeostasis (or more broadly, allostasis [67, 68, 69]) and hence
maintain the structural and functional integrity of πas a living cell. This activity of self-
maintenance has been termed “self-evidencing" [70]; systems compliant with the FEP can
be considered to be continually generating evidence of or for their continued existence
[10].

In the terminology of [13] cells are “strange particles” – their signal transduction pathways
monitor (components of) the states of their environments, but do not directly monitor their
actions on their environments (i.e., their own active states). The consequences of any action

[PAGE 8] can only, therefore, be deduced from the response of the environment. In this situation,
causation is always uncertain: whether an action by the environment on the cell – what
the cell detects as an environmental state change – is a causal consequence of an action the
cell has taken in the past cannot be determined by the data available to the cell. Every
action, therefore, increases VFE, while every observation (potentially) decreases it. The
(apparent) task of the cell's GM is to minimize the increases, on average, while maximizing
the decreases.

The Bayesian mechanics afforded by the FEP implies a (classical) thermodynamics; in-
deed, the FEP can be read as a constrained maximum entropy or caliber principle [71, 72]
(Sakthivadivel 2022, Sakthivadivel 2022). This follows from the fact that inference, i.e., self
evidencing, entails belief updating and belief updating incurs a thermodynamic cost via the
Jarzynski equality [73, 74, 75]. This cost provides a lower bound on the thermodynamic free
energy required for metabolic maintenance. For example, a cell's actions on its environment
e.g., chemotactic locomotion are largely driven by the need to acquire thermodynamic
free energy. The cell's GM cannot, therefore, minimize VFE by minimizing action [76];
instead, it must successfully predict which actions will replenish its free-energy supply. As
actions are energetically expensive, this requires trading off short-term costs against long-
term goals. As shown in [41], selective pressures operating on different timescales favor the
development of metaprocessors that control lower-level actions in a context-dependent way;
these are often implemented via a hierarchical GM [77]. Such meta-level control provides
probabilistic models of risk-sensitive actions in context.

While such systems may be described as regulating free-energy seeking actions, they also
regulate information-seeking actions, i.e., curiosity-driven exploration [78, 79, 80]. This
follows because VFE provides an upper bound on complexity minus accuracy [81]. The
expected free energy (EFE), conditioned upon any action, can therefore be scored in terms
of expected complexity and expected inaccuracy. Expected complexity is “risk” and cor-
responds to the degree of belief updating that incurs a thermodynamic cost; leading to
risk-sensitive control (e.g., phototropism). Expected inaccuracy corresponds to “ambigu-
ity" leading to epistemic behaviors (e.g., searching for lost keys under a streetlamp) [42].

When context-dependent control is considered, the neighborhood of the NESS resolves
into a network of local minima corresponding to fixed perception-action loops separated
by energetic barriers that the control system must overcome to switch between loops. For
example, in a cell, this energetic barrier comprises the energy required to activate one path-
way while de-activating another, which may include the energetic costs of phosphorylation,
other chemical modifications, additional gene expression, etc. Different pairs of pathways
can be expected to be separated by energetic barriers of different heights, generating a
topographically-complex free energy landscape that coarse-grains, in a long-time average,
to the neighborhood of the NESS, i.e., to the maintenance of allostasis [68, 69, 82].

As noted earlier, we can think of controllable perception-action loops as nodes on a factor
graph, with the edges corresponding to pathways for control flow, and the transition prob-
abilities labeling the edges as inversely proportional to the energetic barrier between loops.
This allows representing the GM for meta-level control (i.e., hierarchical) as a message-

[PAGE 9] passing system as described in [47]. The presence of very high energetic barriers can render
such a GM effectively one-way, as seen in the context-dependent switches between signal
transduction pathways and GRNs that characterize cellular differentiation during morpho-
genesis. Biological examples of these include modifications of bioelectric pattern memories
in planaria, which can create alternative-species head shapes that eventually remodel back
to normal [83], or produce 2-headed worms which are permanent, and regenerate as 2-
headed in perpetuity [84].

[PAGE 9] 2.2 The QRF picture

Cellular information processing has traditionally been treated as completely classical, i.e.,
as implemented by causal networks of macromolecules, each of which undergoes classical
state transitions via local dynamical processes that are conditionally independent of the
states of other parts of the network. While the “quantum” nature of proteins and other
macromolecules is broadly acknowledged, the scale at which quantum effects are important
remains controversial, with straightforward single-molecule decoherence models predicting
decoherence times of attoseconds (10-18 s) or less [85, 86]: several orders of magnitude
below the timescales of processes involved in molecular information processing [87]. While
functional roles for quantum coherence in intramolecular information processing have been
demonstrated, intermolecular coherence remains experimentally elusive [88, 89, 90, 91].

The free-energy budgets of both prokaryotic and eukaryotic cells are, however, orders of
magnitude smaller than would be required to support fully-classical information processing
at the molecular scale, suggesting that cells employ quantum coherence as a computational
resource [92]. Indirect evidence of longer-range, tissue-scale coherence in brains has also
been reported [93]. Reformulating the FEP in quantum information-theoretic terms enables
it to describe situations in which long-range coherence, and hence quantum computation,
cannot be neglected.

Following the development in [12], we consider a bipartite decomposition U = AB of a
finite, isolated system U for which the interaction Hamiltonian HAB = Hu - (HA + HB)
is sufficiently weak over the time period of interest that the joint state U is separable (i.e.,
factors) as |U) = |A)|B). In this case, we can choose orthogonal basis vectors |ik) so that:

N
Mk
HAB = BKKBT ΣαΜ,
i
(2)

where KB denotes Boltzmann's constant, T is the absolute temperature of the environment,
k = Aor B, the Mare N mutually-orthogonal Hermitian operators with eigenvalues in
{−1,1}, the a∈ [0, 1] are such that ∑ = 1, and ẞk > In 2 is an inverse measure of k's
thermodynamic efficiency that depends on the internal dynamics Hk; see [56, 58, 94, 95] for
further motivation and details of this construction and [96] for a pedagogical review. This
description is purely topological, attributing no geometry to either U or B; hence it allows

[PAGE 9] 2.2 The QRF picture
Cellular information processing has traditionally been treated as completely classical, i.e.,
as implemented by causal networks of macromolecules, each of which undergoes classical
state transitions via local dynamical processes that are conditionally independent of the
states of other parts of the network. While the “quantum” nature of proteins and other
macromolecules is broadly acknowledged, the scale at which quantum effects are important
remains controversial, with straightforward single-molecule decoherence models predicting
decoherence times of attoseconds (10-18 s) or less [85, 86]: several orders of magnitude
below the timescales of processes involved in molecular information processing [87]. While
functional roles for quantum coherence in intramolecular information processing have been
demonstrated, intermolecular coherence remains experimentally elusive [88, 89, 90, 91].

The free-energy budgets of both prokaryotic and eukaryotic cells are, however, orders of
magnitude smaller than would be required to support fully-classical information processing
at the molecular scale, suggesting that cells employ quantum coherence as a computational
resource [92]. Indirect evidence of longer-range, tissue-scale coherence in brains has also
been reported [93]. Reformulating the FEP in quantum information-theoretic terms enables
it to describe situations in which long-range coherence, and hence quantum computation,
cannot be neglected.

Following the development in [12], we consider a bipartite decomposition U = AB of a
finite, isolated system U for which the interaction Hamiltonian HAB = Hu - (HA + HB)
is sufficiently weak over the time period of interest that the joint state U is separable (i.e.,
factors) as |U) = |A)|B). In this case, we can choose orthogonal basis vectors |ik) so that:

HAB = BKKBT ΣαΜ,
i
(2)

where KB denotes Boltzmann's constant, T is the absolute temperature of the environment,
k = Aor B, the Mare N mutually-orthogonal Hermitian operators with eigenvalues in
{−1,1}, the a∈ [0, 1] are such that ∑ = 1, and ẞk > In 2 is an inverse measure of k's
thermodynamic efficiency that depends on the internal dynamics Hk; see [56, 58, 94, 95] for
further motivation and details of this construction and [96] for a pedagogical review. This
description is purely topological, attributing no geometry to either U or B; hence it allows

[PAGE 10]
the "embedding space" of perceived “objects" to be an observer-dependent construct. It
has several relevant consequences:

• We can regard A and B as separated, and determined by independent measures. They
are separated by – and interact via a holographic screen B that can be represented,
without loss of generality, by an array of N non-interacting qubits, where N is the
dimension of HAB [94, 95].

• A and B can be regarded as exchanging finite N-bit strings, each of which encodes
one eigenvalue of HAB [94].

• A and B have free choice of basis for HAB, corresponding to free choice of local frames
at B, e.g., free choice, for each qubit qi on B, of the local z axis and hence the z-spin
operator sz that acts on qi [96].

• Choice of basis corresponds to choosing the zero-point of total energy) by each of A
and B. The systems A and B are, therefore, in general at informational, but not at
thermal equilibrium [12].

• As A and B must obtain from B or A, respectively, whatever thermodynamic free
energy is required, by Landauer's principle [73, 99, 100], to fund the encoding of
classical bits on B (as well as any other irreversible classical computation), A and B
must each devote some sector F of B to free-energy acquisition. The bits in F are
"burned as fuel" and so do not contribute input data to computations. Waste-heat
dissipation by one system is free energy acquisition by the other. The free-energy
sectors FA and FB of A and B need not align as subsets of qubits on B; that is,
qubits that A regards as free-energy sources may be regarded by B as informative
outputs and vice-versa [56, 58].

• The actions of the internal dynamics HA and HB on B can be represented by A-
and B-specific sets of QRFs, each of which both “measures” and “prepares" qubits
on B. Each QRF acts on the qubits in some specific sector of B, breaking the
permutation symmetry of Eq. (2) [56, 58, 59]. Only QRFs acting on sectors other
than F implement informative computations; we will therefore restrict attention to
these QRFs.

• Each “computational” QRF can, without loss of generality, be represented by a cone-
cocone diagram (CCCD) comprising Barwise-Seligman classifiers and infomorphisms
between them [54, 55]. The apex of each such CCCD is, by definition, both the
category-theoretic limit and colimit of the "input/output" classifiers that correspond,
formally, to the operators M in Eq. (2) [56, 58, 59].

[PAGE 11]
Typically, a CCCD is structured as a distributed information flow in the form:

(3)

incorporating sets of classifiers {A} and (logic) infomorphisms {fi, 9jk} [54, Ch 12] over
suitable index ranges. As a memory-write system, Diagram (3) depicts a generic a blueprint
for a bow-tie or variational autoencoder (VAE) network amenable to describing a hierar-
chical Bayesian network with belief-updating as discussed in e.g. [12, 57, 59]. Crucially, it
is the non-commutativity of CCCDs of this form that specifies intrinsic or quantum con-
textuality, as occurs, for instance, when the colimit core C' is undefinable [57, §7, §8] [59,
§7.2]. Consequences of such contextualityare discussed via examples in §5.

The holographic screen B functions as an MB separating A from B. It can be regarded
as having an N-dimensional, N-qubit Hilbert space Hq₁ = Πiqi. While Hq₁ is strictly
ancillary to Hu = HA & HB, the classical situation can be recovered in the limit in which
the entanglement entropies S(|A)), S(|B)) → 0 by considering the products HA Hqi and
HBHg; to be "particle" state spaces for A and B, respectively. In this classical limit, the
states of Hg; become the blanket states of an MB that functions as a classical information
channel [94, 95, 96]. In quantum holographic coding, for example, B is often represented
by a polygonal tessellation of the hyperbolic disc, with qubits represented by polygonal
centroids. A specific TN model of a pentagon code is developed in [97]; see in particular
their Fig. 4. The geometric description of Bas implementing holographic coding, and its
classical limit as an MB structured as a direct acyclic graph (DAG), is further explored in
the setting of TQNNs in [98].

In this quantum-theoretic picture, “systems”or“objects” observed and manipulated by
A or B correspond to sectors on B that are the domains of particular QRFs deployed
by A or B, respectively [58, 12, 59]. To simplify notation, we use the same symbol, e.g.,
'Q' to denote both a QRF Q and the sector dom(Q) on B. Any identifiable system X
factors into a “reference” component R that maintains a time-invariant state |R) or more
generally, state density PR, that allows re-identification and hence sequential measurements
over extended time, and a “pointer” component P with a time-varying state ❘P) or density
pp. It is this pointer component, named for the pointer of an analog instrument, which
is the "state of interest” for measurements. The QRFS R and P clearly must commute,
and the sectors R and P clearly must be mutually decoherent [58, 12, 59]. All “system”
sectors must be components of some overall sector E that corresponds to the “observable
environment." The recording of measurement outcomes to a classical memory and the
reading of previously-recorded outcomes from memory can similarly be represented by a
QRF Y. As dom(Y) is a sector on B, recorded memories of A are exposed to and hence

[PAGE 12]
subject to modification by B and vice-versa. Both the observable environment E and the
memory sector Y must be disjoint from, and decoherent with, the free-energy sector F.

As actions on B encode classical data, they have an associated free energy cost of at least
ln2 KBT per bit [73, 99, 100] that must originate from the source at F. Time-energy
complementary associates a minimum time of h/[ln2(KBT)], with h being the Planck's
constant, to this energy expenditure. We can, therefore, associate actions on B, including
memory writes, with “ticks” of an internal time QRF, which we denote ta and te for A
and B, respectively. Assuming all observational outcomes are written to memory, we can
represent the situation as in Fig. 1. The time QRF is effectively an outgoing bit counter
that can be represented by a groupoid operator Gij: ti → t; [56]. As outgoing bits are
oriented in opposite directions with respect to B for A and B, the time “arrows" ta and
te point in opposite directions. Hence A and B can both be regarded as “interacting with
their own futures” as discussed in [96].


Measurements of a system X can be considered sequential if: 1) they separated in time
according to the internal time QRF, and 2) their outcomes are recorded to memory to enable
comparability across time. We show in [59] that sequential measurements can always be

[PAGE 13]
represented by one of two schemata. Using the compact notation:

(4)

to represent a QRF S, we can represent measurements of a physical situation in which one
system divides into two, possibly entangled, systems with a diagram of the form:

(5)

Parametric down-conversion of a photon exemplifies this kind of process. The reverse
process can be added to yield:

(6)

In the second type of sequential measurement process, the pointer-state QRF P is replaced
with an alternative QRF Q with which it does not commute. Sequences in which position
and momentum, sz and sx are measured alternately are examples. These can be represented
by the diagram

(7)

As both P and Q must commute with R, the commutativity requirements for S are satisfied.
The sequences of operations depicted in Diagrams (6) and (7) clearly raise the questions
of how control is implemented, and of how the context changes that drive control flow are
detected. Before turning to these questions in §3, we review a path-integral representation of
QRFs, show that the same representation captures the behavior of any system X identified
by a QRF, and discuss the questions of multiple observers and quantum contextuality.

[PAGE 13]
represented by one of two schemata. Using the compact notation:
S
(4)
to represent a QRF S, we can represent measurements of a physical situation in which one
system divides into two, possibly entangled, systems with a diagram of the form:
S1
S
S2
(5)
Parametric down-conversion of a photon exemplifies this kind of process. The reverse
process can be added to yield:
S
S
S1
S
S2
(6)
In the second type of sequential measurement process, the pointer-state QRF P is replaced
with an alternative QRF Q with which it does not commute. Sequences in which position
and momentum, sz and sx are measured alternately are examples. These can be represented
by the diagram
P
S
S
S
(7)
R
R
As both P and Q must commute with R, the commutativity requirements for S are satisfied.
The sequences of operations depicted in Diagrams (6) and (7) clearly raise the questions
of how control is implemented, and of how the context changes that drive control flow are
detected. Before turning to these questions in §3, we review a path-integral representation of
QRFs, show that the same representation captures the behavior of any system X identified
by a QRF, and discuss the questions of multiple observers and quantum contextuality.

[PAGE 14]
2.3 The TQFT picture
As a least-action principle, the FEP is fundamentally a statement about the paths followed
by the joint system U through its state space. The classical FEP is amenable to a path-
integral formulation [13] that expresses the expected value of any observable (functional)
Ω[x(t)] of paths x(t) through the relevant state space as ([101], Eq. 6):
(Ω[x(t)])
=
fdro / d[x(t)][x(t)]p(x(t)\xo)po(To)
(8)
where xo is the initial state and p(x(t)|xo) is the conditional probability of the path x(t).
Quantum theory generalizes this expression by, effectively. replacing Ω[x(t)] with an au-
tomorphism on the relevant Hilbert space and p(x(t)|xo) with an amplitude for x(t) given
the initial state xo. For some finite-dimensional Hilbert space H, the manifold of all such
automorphisms is a cobordism on H, which is by definition a TQFT on H [102].
We show in [59] that any sequential measurement of any sector X of B induces a TQFT on
X, considered as a projection of the N-dimensional boundary Hilbert space Hq₁ associated
with B. In particular, measurement sequences of the form of Diagram (6) can be mapped
to cobordisms, i.e., to manifolds of maps between two designated boundaries, of the form:
B
B
S1
S
S
(i)
S2
(9)
F(k)
S1
S
Fo
S2


[PAGE 15]
while sequences of the form of Diagram (7) can be mapped to cobordisms of the form:
B
B
P
Q
S
R
R
(10)
F(i)|
|F(k)
P
Q
S
Fo
R
R
In either case, F : CCCD → Cob is the functor from the category CCCD of CCCDs (and
hence of QRFs) to the category of Cob finite cobordisms required to define a TQFT. In
general, we can state:
Theorem 1 ([59] Thm. 1). For any morphism F of CCCDs in CCCD, there is a cobor-
dism I such that a diagram of the form of Diagram (9) or (10) commutes.
referring to [59] for the proof.
Theorem 1 applies to any sequential measurement; therefore, it applies to measurements
of a sector X followed by measurements of the associated memory sector Y, or vice versa.
Assuming for convenience dim(X) = dim(Y), we can consider a composite operation Q =
(,), where Q = QxQy and a = QyQx, is then a pair of QRF sequences that can
be identified with TQFTs that measure and record an outcome, mapping Hx → Hy,
and dually use an outcome read from memory to prepare a state, mapping Hy → Hx,

[PAGE 16]
respectively as in Diagram 11:
B
(11)
This composite operator Q is, by Theorem 1, a TQFT [98]. Hence the operation of recording
observational outcomes for a sector X made at t to memory, and then comparing them to
later observations at t + ∆t, is formally equivalent to propagating the “system” X forward
in time from t tot + At.
Identifying QRFs as "internal" TQFTs allows a general analysis of information exchange
between multiple QRFs deployed by a single system, e.g., A. Because all QRFs act on
B, information exchange between QRFs requires a channel that traverses B. Any such
channel is itself a QRF, one deployed by B. Considering A to comprise two observers,
one deploying Q₁ and the other deploying Q2, that interact via a local operations, classical
communication (LOCC [103]) protocol provides an example:
B
A
B
Q1
(12)
Quantum channel
Q2
Classical channel
In a LOCC protocol, one channel is considered “classical" while the other is considered
"quantum”; however, this language masks the fact that both channels are physical. As
pointed out in [104], all media supporting classical communication are physical, and inter-
actions with these media are always local measurements or preparations. Hence the two
channels in a LOCC protocol are physically equivalent – both are TQFTs implemented by
B- although their conventional semantics are different.


[PAGE 17]
Diagram (12) can, clearly also represent externally-mediated communication between any
two functional components of a system, e.g., macromolecular pathways within a cell or
functional networks within a brain. We show in [98] that whenever Q1 and Q2 are deployed
by distinct - technically, separable or mutually decoherent – “observers” or “systems,” they
fail to commute, i.e., the commutator [Q1, Q2] = Q1Q2 - Q2Q1 ≥ h/2, where again h is
Planck's constant. As shown in [57], Theorem 3.4 using the CCCD representation, non-
commutativity of QRFs induces quantum contextuality, i.e., dependence of measurement
results on “non-local hidden variables" that characterize the measurement context [105,
106, 107]. In the current context, such hidden variables characterize the action of HB on
B, affecting what A will observe next in every cycle of A-B interaction.
As shown in [63], such context dependence can, in principle, be captured classically if
sufficient measurements of the context can be implemented. Such measurements would,
however, have to access all of B. The existence of an MB prevents such access; in the
current setting, A has access to B only via B. The finite energetic cost of measurement,
and consequent requirement for a thermodynamic sector F, prevents measurement even of
all of B by any finite physical system. Hence, we can expect physical systems, including
all biological systems, to employ only local context-dependent control to switch between
mutually non-commuting (sets of) QRFs. How context switches implemented by QRF
switches induce evolution, development and learning was introduced in [22]. Some specific
of context switching will be discussed §5.

[PAGE 17]
3 Tensor network representation of control flow
3.1 Tensor networks and holographic duality
Entanglement and quantum error correction, two concepts developed in quantum informa-
tion theory, have been proved to have a fundamental role in unveiling quantum gravity
[108]. At the origin of this consideration there has been the discovery by Bekenstein and
Hawking [109, 110, 111, 112] that the second law of thermodynamics can be preserved in the
gravitational field of a black hole, if this latter has an entropy proportional to the area of its
horizon, by the inverse of the Newton gravitational constant G. This entropy is maximal,
as implied by the second law itself, providing an upper bound for possible configurations of
matter within a region of the same size [113, 114].
Nonetheless, the scaling of the local degrees of freedom counted by the entropy does not
increase as the volume, hinging toward the formulation of the holographic conjecture [115],
suggesting a division between the information that can only be retrieved on the boundary
world, and a merely apparent bulk world. AdS/CFT realized the holographic conjecture,
postulating a duality between gravity in asymptotically AdS space and quantum field theory
on the spatial infinity of the AdS space [116]. Giving literal meaning to the duality, Ryu
and Takayanagi (RT) proposed that entanglement of a boundary region fulfils the same law

[PAGE 17] 3 Tensor network representation of control flow
3.1 Tensor networks and holographic duality

Entanglement and quantum error correction, two concepts developed in quantum informa-
tion theory, have been proved to have a fundamental role in unveiling quantum gravity
[108]. At the origin of this consideration there has been the discovery by Bekenstein and
Hawking [109, 110, 111, 112] that the second law of thermodynamics can be preserved in the
gravitational field of a black hole, if this latter has an entropy proportional to the area of its
horizon, by the inverse of the Newton gravitational constant G. This entropy is maximal,
as implied by the second law itself, providing an upper bound for possible configurations of
matter within a region of the same size [113, 114].

Nonetheless, the scaling of the local degrees of freedom counted by the entropy does not
increase as the volume, hinging toward the formulation of the holographic conjecture [115],
suggesting a division between the information that can only be retrieved on the boundary
world, and a merely apparent bulk world. AdS/CFT realized the holographic conjecture,
postulating a duality between gravity in asymptotically AdS space and quantum field theory
on the spatial infinity of the AdS space [116]. Giving literal meaning to the duality, Ryu
and Takayanagi (RT) proposed that entanglement of a boundary region fulfils the same law

[PAGE 18]
as for the black hole entropy, replacing the area of the black hole horizon with an extremal
surface area that bounds the bulk region under scrutiny.

While on the boundaries the theory can be individuated assigning a specific conformal
field theory (CFT), in the bulk the geometry can be associated to specific entanglement
structures of the quantum systems. This is for instance what happens to the ground states
of a CFT associated to an AdS space: the RT area surface increases less fast than the
volume of the boundary. When the boundary is at equilibrium, in a thermal state of finite
temperature, the bulk geometry corresponds to that of a black hole, its horizon being
parallel to the boundary and its size increasing with the temperature. The RT surface is
then confined between the boundary and the back hole horizon, approaching the boundary
at higher temperature and increasing its entropy. These considerations suggest the existence
of a subtle link interconnecting the structure of space-time and quantum entanglement, and
hence that a theory of quantum gravity must be fundamentally holographic, where its states
satisfy the RT formula for some bulk geometry.

The existence of an exact correspondence between bulk gravity and quantum theory at the
boundary may hinge toward possible inconsistencies with locality. This has been discussed
in the literature, in terms of local reconstruction theory [117, 118, 119]: variables in the
bulk (e.g. bulk spins) can be controlled instantaneously from the boundary, but requiring
simultaneous access to a large portion of the boundary: locality and upper speed of light do
not hold exactly in this theory. Nonetheless, local observers confined in small regions at the
boundary still fulfil locality and the existence of an upper limit of the speed of information
exchange, in a way that is reminiscent of quantum error correction code (QECC) in quantum
information theory: information is stored redundantly, in such a way that when part of
it is corrupted, a reconstruction of information is still possible. Locality in the bulk is
therefore a QECC property of the encoding map that realizes the duality between bulk and
boundary. On the other hand, these properties are strictly connected to RT, which provides
the necessary resource of entanglement for QEEC to emerge.

The RT formula and QECC are properties fulfilled by different classes of models, among
which TNs [120]. These have been first introduced in condensed matter physics as varia-
tional wave-functions of strongly correlated systems [121, 122]. TNs are many-body wave-
functions that can be derived composing few-body quantum states, which are indeed ten-
sors. A prototype of TN is e.g. the Einstein-Podolsky-Rosen (EPR) entangled pairs of
qubits: in an entangled basis, measured qbits are in some entangled pure state and can be
composed with remaining ones with increasing complexity: complicated quantum entan-
glement can be derived by only entangling a few qubits [123].

[PAGE 19]
Particularly relevant for its implications on the reconstruction of the space-time structure
is the multi-scale entanglement renormalization ansatz (MERA) [124]. TNs can be nat-
urally related to holography duality by considering that their entanglement entropy can
be controlled by their graph geometry. Some versions of TNs that are characterized by
RT entanglement entropy and QEEC have been constructed resorting to stabilizer codes
[125, 126] and random tensors with large bond dimension [127]. TNs with random tensors
at each node can be regarded as random states restricted by the topology of the network.

Exactly as random states are almost maximally entangled, random TNs show through the
RT formula an almost maximal entanglement, providing a large family of states with in-
teresting properties to explore holographic duality. Furthermore, for random TNs the RT
formula holds in generic spaces with not necessarily hyperbolic geometry, hinging toward
an extension of holographic duality beyond AdS, to more general configurations in quan-
tum gravity. Nonetheless, at least in three dimensions, random tensor networks have been
related to the gravitational action, by means of the Regge calculus [128].

On the other hand, since geometry emerges as a specification of the entanglement structure,
one may consider that the Einstein equations should be connected as well to the dynamics
of entanglement. For small perturbations around the ground state of a CFT in boundary,
linearized Einstein equations have been derived from the RT formula [129, 130]. Indeed,
the conformal symmetry enables a relations between the energy momentum and the entan-
glement entropy, and consequently the area of the extremal surface can be connected to
the energy-momentum distribution at the boundary – this is equivalent to the linearized
Einstein equations.

The dynamics on the boundary, on the other side, shows a chaotic behaviour, with scram-
bling of the single-particle operators, which evolve into multi-particle operators [131]. Max-
imal chaotic behaviour recovered in the ladder operators commutator growth, is encoded in
the out-of-time-ordered correlation (OTOC) functions, characterized by exponential growth
in time and temperature. A model endowed with this properties is e.g. the Sachdev-Ye-
Kitaev model, developed to describe certain systems in condensed matter physics, such as
Gapless spin-fluid [132, 133, 134]. On the other hand, operator scrambling is also related
to QEEC: the chaotic dynamics at the boundary instantiates QECC preserving quantum
information, efficiently hidden (and protected) behind the horizon. Nevertheless this has
led to may questions, concerning the information behind the horizon being eventually ac-
cessible from the boundary though non-local measurements, the fate of the local degrees of
freedom hitting the singularity, the relation among the causal structure of the bulk and a
smooth geometry across the horizon.

[PAGE 20]
3.2 General results

We can move to prove a general result:

Theorem 2. A system A exhibits non-trivial control flow if, and only if, its control flow
can be represented by a TN.

and examine some of its corollaries. We begin by defining:

Definition 1. Control flow is trivial if a system deploys only one QRF.

As any collection of mutually-commuting QRFs can be represented as a single QRF [57, 59],
any system that deploys only mutually-commuting QRFs exhibits trivial control flow.

Systems that deploy only a single QRF “do the same thing" regardless of context, and so
do not qualify as “interesting" in the sense used here. As noted above, no finite physical
system can measure the entire state of its boundary with a single QRF, so no such system
can simultaneously measure and act on its entire context. Any system A that deploys
multiple QRFs in sequence cannot, as noted above, avoid contextuality due to unobservable
effects, mediated by the action of HB, of the action of Qi on the state measured by Qj.
Every action taken by an “interesting” system, in other words, at least transiently increases
the VFE at its boundary.

Consider, then, a system A that deploys multiple, distinct QRFs Q1, Q2,... Qn, where
n < N = dim(HAB). Classical control flow in A can then be represented by a matrix
CF = [Pij], where Pij is the probability of the control transition Qi → Qj. As noted
earlier, any such transition has an energetic cost, which must be paid with free energy
sources from F.

The matrix CF is a 2-tensor. Theorem 2 states that this tensor can be decomposed into a
TN. We prove it as follows:

Proof (Thm. 2). Suppose first that control flow in a system A can be represented by a
TN. A TN is, by definition, a factorization of a tensor operator into a network of tensor
operators. This network can be either hierarchical or flat; if it is hierarchical, each layer
can be considered a flat TN. Hence no generality is lost in considering just the case of
a flat TN, which is an operator contraction T = TijTjkTkl..., where summation on
shared indices is left implicit. In general, Tik Tik = Tkj, hence these expressions do not
commute. They therefore represent non-trivial control flow. Conversely, any non-trivial
control flow can be written, at any fixed scale or level of abstraction, as a linear sequence
of (in general probabilistic) operators. The fixed order of operators in the sequence can be
encoded formally by adding “spatial" indices as needed to allow contraction over shared
indices. Hence any non-trivial control flow at a fixed scale can be written as a flat TN.
This construction can be repeated at each larger scale to produce a hierarchical TN over a
collection of "lowest-scale" TNs. ■

We can now examine two corollaries of this result:

Corollary 1. Decoherent reference sectors exist on B if and only if control flow can be
implemented by a TN.

Proof. Decoherence sectors require independently-deployable, non-commuting QRFs. This
requires a control structure that factors, by Theorem 2 a TN. Conversely, a TN factors
the control structure, making QRFs independently deployable, which renders their sectors
decoherent. ■

Equivalently, the GM factors if, and only if, control flow can be implemented by a TΝ.

Corollary 2. The TN of any system compliant with the FEP is a decomposition of the
Identity.

[PAGE 21]
Proof. The FEP applies to systems with a NESS, and drives such systems to return to (the
vicinity of) the NESS after any perturbation. Hence at a sufficiently large scale, the TN of
any such system is a cycle, i.e., a decomposition of the Identity. ■

Many standard TN models, e.g., MERAs, assume boundary conditions asymptotically far,
in numbers of lowest-scale operators, from the region of the network that is of interest.
Identifying such asymptotic boundary conditions yields a cyclic system.

Theorem 2, together with its corollaries, provides a natural, formal means of classifying
systems by their control architectures. At a high level, two characteristics distinguish
systems with different architectures:

• Hierarchical depth indicates the number of "virtual machine" layers [135] the ar-
chitecture supports. The interfaces between these layers implement coarse-graining,
removing from the higher-level representation all dimensions, and hence all informa-
tion, which is contracted out of the lower-level operators.

• Number and location of contractions that yield unitary operators, and hence build in
entanglement between lower-level operators. The natural limit is a MERA, in which
every pair of lower-level operators is entangled at every hierarchical level [48].

The control-flow architecture, in turn, specifies the structure of the “layout" of distinguish-
able sectors on B and hence of detectable features/objects in the environment. Locality on
B requires a hierarchical TN; detectable entanglement requires a MERA-like TN. Locality
is required for detectable features/objects to appear to have components with nested de-
composition. Any QRF for geometric space, and hence for spacetime, must be hierarchical,
and must be a MERA if entanglement in space is to be detected. A MERA is required, in
particular, if the use of coherence between spatially-separated systems as a computational
or communication resource is detectable.

To illustrate the classification of systems by hierarchical level, consider the ten-step cyclic
TN shown in Diagram (13):


and its extension to a hierarchy as shown in Diagram (14):

[PAGE 21] Proof. The FEP applies to systems with a NESS, and drives such systems to return to (the
vicinity of) the NESS after any perturbation. Hence at a sufficiently large scale, the TN of
any such system is a cycle, i.e., a decomposition of the Identity.
Many standard TN models, e.g., MERAs, assume boundary conditions asymptotically far,
in numbers of lowest-scale operators, from the region of the network that is of interest.
Identifying such asymptotic boundary conditions yields a cyclic system.
Theorem 2, together with its corollaries, provides a natural, formal means of classifying
systems by their control architectures. At a high level, two characteristics distinguish
systems with different architectures:
• Hierarchical depth indicates the number of "virtual machine" layers [135] the ar-
chitecture supports. The interfaces between these layers implement coarse-graining,
removing from the higher-level representation all dimensions, and hence all informa-
tion, which is contracted out of the lower-level operators.
• Number and location of contractions that yield unitary operators, and hence build in
entanglement between lower-level operators. The natural limit is a MERA, in which
every pair of lower-level operators is entangled at every hierarchical level [48].
The control-flow architecture, in turn, specifies the structure of the “layout" of distinguish-
able sectors on B and hence of detectable features/objects in the environment. Locality on
B requires a hierarchical TN; detectable entanglement requires a MERA-like TN. Locality
is required for detectable features/objects to appear to have components with nested de-
composition. Any QRF for geometric space, and hence for spacetime, must be hierarchical,
and must be a MERA if entanglement in space is to be detected. A MERA is required, in
particular, if the use of coherence between spatially-separated systems as a computational
or communication resource is detectable.
To illustrate the classification of systems by hierarchical level, consider the ten-step cyclic
TN shown in Diagram (13):
and its extension to a hierarchy as shown in Diagram (14):
where red, blue, and green colors indicate distinct hierarchical “layers” of tensor contrac-
tions. We have trained artificial neural networks (ANNs) to execute these TNs as the
sequences of state transitions shown in Table 1. The first sequence (Dataset 1) is a ten-step
cycle shown Diagram (13); the second sequence (Dataset 2) layers the coarse-grained state
transitions of Diagram (14) onto this ten-step cycle. In Dataset 2, a two-bit tag is used to
differentiate the “low-level” from the coarse-grained “high-level" cycles. An example state
state transition from a randomly-generated initial state is shown in Fig. 2; the red-on-green
bit pattern effectively moves“up” one step on each state-transition cycle.

[PAGE 23] We trained two ANNs, one to execute each of the control cycles shown in Table 1. The
networks are each composed of three layers, as illustrated in Fig. 3, with network sizes of
[10, 50, 10] and [10, 200, 10], respectively, for the input, hidden, and output layers. The
units in the hidden layer use the rectified linear unit (ReLU) nonlinear activation function
and the neurons in the output layer use the hyperbolic tangent activation function. The
network is connected in a feedforward way where a neuron in one layer connects to every
neuron in the next layer. Since the ANN serves as a switch state controller, we use a training
scheme, similar to one-class classification [136], where the training data are the only data
that the network learns to produce. In so doing, the network learns to overfit the training
data, and any input outside of the designated state-encoding is discarded. The network
is, therefore, not expected to deviate from the learned pattern. The network learns both
control regimes wth 100% accuracy after training with 3,000 randomly-generated 10-bit
inputs.
In the more realistic case of noisy input data, where binary states can be flipped, the
Bidirectional Associative Memory (BAM), a minimal two-layer nonlinear feedback network
[137], is a viable alternative to a shallow feed-forward ANN. The architecure is shown in
Fig. 4. This BAM network learns to associate between the two initial and final states in
Table 1, with similar performance to that of the feed-forward network.

[PAGE 24] 4 Implementing control flow with TQNNS
Tensor Networks can be naturally associated to the matrix elements of physical scalar
products among topological quantum neural networks (TQNNs). Physical scalar products
encode indeed the dynamics of TQFTs, since they fulfill their constraints of imposing
flatness of the curvature and gauge invariance. Thus, the matrix elements associated to
scalar products can be seen as evolution matrix elements for the spin-network states that
span the Hilbert spaces of TQNNs.

[PAGE 25] 4.1 Tensor networks as classifiers for TQNNS
A notable example is provided by BF theories [138], a class of TQFTs particularly well
studied in the literature of mathematical physics that enables expressing effective theories
of particle physics, gravity and condensed matter, and provides as well a general frame-
work for implementations of models of quantum information and quantum computation,
machine learning (ML) and neuroscience. These are defined on the principal bundle M of
a connection A for some internal gauge group G, with algebra g, according to the action
on a d-dimensional manifold Ma
where B is an ad(g)-valued d-2-form, F denotes the field-strength of A, which is a 2-form,
and the trace Tr is over the internal indices of g, ensuring gauge invariance of the density
Lagrangian L = Tr[B ^ F] of the BF theory.
Variation with respect to the conjugated variables, the connection A and the B frame-field,
closing a canonical symplectic structure, provide the equations of motion of the theory
[138]:
respectively the curvature constraint, imposing the flatness of the connection, and the Gauß
constraint, imposing invariance under gauge transformations, having denoted with da the
covariant derivative with respect to the connection A.
At the quantum level, the states of the kinematical Hilbert space of the theory, fulfilling
by construction the Gauß constraint, can be represented in terms of cylindrical functionals
Cyl, supported on graphs Γ that are unions of segments Yi, the end points of which meet
in nodes n, and with holonomies – elements of the group G - H [A] of the connection A
assigned to Yi and intertwiner operators – invariant tensor product of representations
assigned to the nodes n.
For G = SU(2), spin-networks |Г, jy, tn), supported on Γand labelled by the spin jy of
the irreducible representations of the group elements assigned to y and by the quantum
intertwiner numbers in associated to un, represent a basis of the kinematical Hilbert space
of the theory. In terms of functionals of Cyl, one can provide the holonomy representation,
which is related to the “spin and intertwiner” representation of |Γ, jy, tn) by means of the
Peter-Weyl transform. This allows us to decompose the spin-network cylindric functional
as [139]:
with D(i) are Wigner matrices providing representation matrices of the SU(2) group ele-
ments.

[PAGE 25] 4.1 Tensor networks as classifiers for TQNNS
A notable example is provided by BF theories [138], a class of TQFTs particularly well
studied in the literature of mathematical physics that enables expressing effective theories
of particle physics, gravity and condensed matter, and provides as well a general frame-
work for implementations of models of quantum information and quantum computation,
machine learning (ML) and neuroscience. These are defined on the principal bundle M of
a connection A for some internal gauge group G, with algebra g, according to the action
on a d-dimensional manifold Ma

S = ∫_{Ma} Tr[BF], (15)

where B is an ad(g)-valued d-2-form, F denotes the field-strength of A, which is a 2-form,
and the trace Tr is over the internal indices of g, ensuring gauge invariance of the density
Lagrangian L = Tr[B ∧ F] of the BF theory.
Variation with respect to the conjugated variables, the connection A and the B frame-field,
closing a canonical symplectic structure, provide the equations of motion of the theory
[138]:

F=0, d_AB = 0, (16)

respectively the curvature constraint, imposing the flatness of the connection, and the Gauß
constraint, imposing invariance under gauge transformations, having denoted with d_A the
covariant derivative with respect to the connection A.
At the quantum level, the states of the kinematical Hilbert space of the theory, fulfilling
by construction the Gauß constraint, can be represented in terms of cylindrical functionals
Cyl, supported on graphs Γ that are unions of segments γ_i, the end points of which meet
in nodes n, and with holonomies – elements of the group G - H_[γ_i][A] of the connection A
assigned to γ_i and intertwiner operators – invariant tensor product of representations –
assigned to the nodes n.

For G = SU(2), spin-networks |Γ, j_γ, t_n⟩, supported on Γ and labelled by the spin j_γ of
the irreducible representations of the group elements assigned to γ and by the quantum
intertwiner numbers i_n associated to u_n, represent a basis of the kinematical Hilbert space
of the theory. In terms of functionals of Cyl, one can provide the holonomy representation,
which is related to the “spin and intertwiner” representation of |Γ, j_γ, t_n⟩ by means of the
Peter-Weyl transform. This allows us to decompose the spin-network cylindric functional
as [139]:

Ψ_{j_γ,i_n}(h_{γ_ij}) = ⊗_n V_{i_n} (17)

with D^(i) are Wigner matrices providing representation matrices of the SU(2) group ele-
ments.

[PAGE 26]
The functorial evolution among spin-networks is ensured by the projector operator [140],
which implements the curvature constraint in the physical scalar product among states, i.e.

⟨in|P|out⟩, with P = ∫ D[N] exp(i ∫ Tr[NF']), (18)

We may then regard |in⟩ as elements of the Hilbert space, and without loss of generality pick
up those ones resulting from composing tensorially in Cyl k-representations of holonomies.
We may further denote them as |j₁...j_k⟩, with some ordering prescription to associate
the topological structure of Γ to the sequence of spin labels. Physically evolving states
P|in⟩ are distinguished from the former ones by labelling them as |j₁···j_k⟩. Similarly, we
introduce |out⟩ as the tensor product of (n-k)-representations of holonomies, and denote
these states as |l₁ ... l_{n−k}⟩. Then the matrix elements of ⟨in|P|out⟩ naturally give rise [98]
to an n-tensor, i.e.

⟨l₁...l_{n−k}|j₁... j_k⟩ = T_{l₁...l_{n−k}j₁...j_k} • (19)

[PAGE 26] 4.2 Geometric RG flow for TQNNs and TNs
The mathematical structures of TQNNs we summarized in Sec. 4.1 are picturing systems “at
equilibrium", for which TQFTs characterize a topological stability that percolates into the
related transition amplitudes. Nonetheless, it is worth considering as well how stochastic
noise might interfere with the topological order ensured by TQFTs, and study the role of
“out-of-equilibrium” physics in the analysis of the evolution of the systems under scrutiny.
Out-of-equilibrium dynamics is instantiated considering a heat-flow evolution of the funda-
mental fields of the theory, with respect to a thermal time τ. Typical Langevin equations,
complemented with stochastic noise, provide through their convergence toward the equa-
tions of motion of the theory the relaxation toward equilibrium of the field configurations
representing specific systems [141]. In general, given some fields φ_σ, with a classical equa-
tion of motion derived, according to the variational principle δS/δφ_σ, from an action S over
a Euclidean manifold M, the associated Langevin equations read:

∂_τ φ_σ = δS/δφ_σ + η_σ, (20)

with η_σ a stochastic noise term. The theory at equilibrium is characterized by the symme-
tries of the equations of motion dS/δφ = 0 that are broken in the transient phase [142];
these symmetries are consistent with – and in the case of BF theories, actually generated
by - the theories at equilibrium.
A prototype of geometric heat-flow was introduced by Hamilton, and then used by Perelman
to prove the Poincaré conjecture, which goes under the name of Ricci flow. Here the
gravitational field g_μν is the basic configurational space field, while the drift terms are the
Einstein equations of motion in the vacuum, which indeed are expressed by requiring that

[PAGE 27]
the components of the Ricci tensor vanish, i.e. R_μν = 0. The Ricci flow then reads

∂_τ g_μν = −2R_μν, (21)

having considered now a Lorentzian manifold M. The Ricci flow equations can be further
complemented introducing the Ricci target R = κ²(T_μν − 1/2g_μνT), expressed in terms
of the Newton constant G = κ²/(8π) and the energy-momentum tensor of matter T_μν, so
as to obtain at equilibrium the Einstein equations:

R_μν – 1/2g_μν R = κ²T_μν, or equivalently R_μν = κ²T'_μν (22)

The stochastic version of the Ricci flow, with heat equation turning into a Langevin equa-
tion, has been introduced and deepened in [142] for a generic gravitational system in the
presence of matter fields, describing an action S for gravity and matter. Moving then from:

∂_τ g_μν = 1/κ² δS/δα_μν + ηg_μν, (23)

in which a multiplicative noise η_μν = η g_μν appears, the Hamiltonian analysis of the stochas-
tic Ricci flow (SRF) in the Adomian decomposition method (ADM) variables has been
derived [142].
An essential by-product of the discussion, from the Ricci flow perspective, is that the
equilibration trajectories corresponds to those of a renormalization group (RG) flow. The
thermal time τ plays the role of scale parameter that individuates a dimension in the
bulk, which is out-of-equilibrium. The boundaries are recovered asymptotically in τ, in the
infra-red regime, and are by definition at equilibrium and thus symmetric.
For a particular class of TQFTs, the BF theories we have introduced in Sec. 4.1 for im-
plementing TQNNs and TNs, the geometric RG flow acquire a specific expression as the
TQFT equivalent of the gravitational Ricci flow [143].

[PAGE 27] 4.3 TNs as a generalization of the main model architectures in ML
The use of TNs is an emerging topic in the ML community. The integration between the
two appears quite immediate. A TN structure can be viewed as an ML model in which
the parameters are properly adjusted to learn the classification of a data set. Yet, as
Ref. [144] mentions, machine learning can aid, in turn, in determining a factorization of
a TN approximating a data set. Moreover, TNs are also used to compress the layers of
ANN architectures, besides a variety of other uses. Tensor networks are becoming more and
more popular to the extent that they are a powerful tool for representing and manipulating
high-dimensional data, as in the case of image and video classification tasks in which the
data is represented as a high-dimensional tensor. High efficiency, flexibility, and easy to

[PAGE 28]
use are making them a dominant choice for many AI applications. Furthermore, besides
being used to represent data, TNs can be used to process data by exploiting a number
of operators. This feature makes them an effective technique for processing data in ML
applications.
As it is well known, TNs are particularly well suited for representing quantum many-body
states in which the dimension of the Hilbert space is exponentially large in the number of
particles. The corresponding ML approach consists in:
• Lifting data to exponentially higher spaces;
• Applying any linear classifier f(x) = W*Φ(X) to a non-linear space;
• Compressing the weights by using TNs.

The output of the model is a separation of classes that would not be linearly separable in
a linear space. In particular, the decision function is the overlap of the weight tensor W
with the feature map tensor Ф as in Fig. 5. The weight tensor W can be approximated by
the decomposition in Fig. 6.

Regularization and optimization are built as a constructive product of low-order tensors
while weight compression is performed by using the Matrix Product States (MPS) de-
composition. If we look at Deep Neural Networks as a piecewise composition of linear

[PAGE 29]
discriminators (logistic regression functions), then the TN framework appears as a gener-
alization of the main model architectures found in the ML literature, e.g. Support Vector
Machines, Kernel models, and Deep Neural Networks.

The literature concerning the use of tensor theory in traditional ML is becoming large. A
short review starts with a seminal paper by Stoudenmire and Schwab [146], which demon-
strated how algorithms for optimizing TNs can be adapted to supervised learning tasks
by using MPS (tensor trains) to parametrize non-linear kernel learning models. Novikov,
Trofimov, and Oseledets [147] have shown how an exponentially large tensor of parameters
can be represented in a factorized format called Tensor Train (TT), with the consequence
of obtaining a regularization of the model. van Glasser, Pancotti, and Cirac [148] explored
the connection between TNs and probabilistic graphical models by introducing the concept
of a "generalized tensor network architecture” for ML. Ref. [149] then designed a generative
model, i.e. a traditional machine learning model that learns joint probability distributions
from data and generates samples according to it, by using MPS. Ref. [150] made use of
autoregressive MPSs for building an unsupervised learning model that goes beyond proof-
of-concept by showing performance comparable to standard traditional models. Finally,
Ref. [151] analyzes the contribution of polynomials of different degrees to the supervised
learning performance of different architectures.

[PAGE 29] 5 Implications for biological control systems
Scale-free biology requires a smooth transition from quantum-like to classical-like behavior.
Typical representations of metabolic, signal-transduction, and gene-regulatory pathways are
entirely classical, even though many of their steps involve electron-transfer or other mecha-
nisms that are acknowledged to require a quantum-theoretic description [87, 152]. As noted
earlier, free-energy budget considerations suggest that both prokaryotic and eukaryotic cells
employ quantum coherence as a computational resource [92]. Emerging empirical evidence
for longer-range entanglement in mammalian brains suggests that large-scale networks may
also be using quantum coherence as a resource [93]. Control flow models must, therefore,
support the possibility of quantum computation in biological systems. Hierarchical TNs
that include unitary components, e.g., MERA-type models, provide this capability.
In prokaryotes, the primary tasks of control flow are adapting metabolism to available re-
sources via metabolite-driven gene regulation [153] and initiating DNA replication and
cell division when conditions are favorable. We can, therefore, expect shallow hierar-
chies of effectively classical control transitions in these organisms. Eukaryotes, however,
are characterized by both intracellular compartmentalization and morphological degrees
of freedom at the whole-cell scale. We have shown previously that the FEP will induce
“neuromorphic" morphologies – i.e. morphologies that segregate inputs from outputs and
enable a fan-in/fan-out computational architecture – in any systems with morphological
degrees of freedom [154]. Such systems can be expected to have deep control hierarchies
at the cellular level, with hierarchical structure correlating with morphological structure

[PAGE 29] Implications for biological control systems
Scale-free biology requires a smooth transition from quantum-like to classical-like behavior.
Typical representations of metabolic, signal-transduction, and gene-regulatory pathways are
entirely classical, even though many of their steps involve electron-transfer or other mecha-
nisms that are acknowledged to require a quantum-theoretic description [87, 152]. As noted
earlier, free-energy budget considerations suggest that both prokaryotic and eukaryotic cells
employ quantum coherence as a computational resource [92]. Emerging empirical evidence
for longer-range entanglement in mammalian brains suggests that large-scale networks may
also be using quantum coherence as a resource [93]. Control flow models must, therefore,
support the possibility of quantum computation in biological systems. Hierarchical TNs
that include unitary components, e.g., MERA-type models, provide this capability.

In prokaryotes, the primary tasks of control flow are adapting metabolism to available re-
sources via metabolite-driven gene regulation [153] and initiating DNA replication and
cell division when conditions are favorable. We can, therefore, expect shallow hierar-
chies of effectively classical control transitions in these organisms. Eukaryotes, however,
are characterized by both intracellular compartmentalization and morphological degrees
of freedom at the whole-cell scale. We have shown previously that the FEP will induce
“neuromorphic" morphologies – i.e. morphologies that segregate inputs from outputs and
enable a fan-in/fan-out computational architecture – in any systems with morphological
degrees of freedom [154]. Such systems can be expected to have deep control hierarchies
at the cellular level, with hierarchical structure correlating with morphological structure

[PAGE 30]
in morphologically-complex cells such as neurons [155], and in multicellular assemblages at
all scales. As well as managing metabolism and replication, such systems must implement
active exploration of the environment, communication with other systems, and – crucially
for cognition – the writing and reading of stigmergic memories. Thus we can expect such
systems to implement QRFs for spacetime and for specific kinds of objects, e.g., conspecifics
and suitable substrates for recording stigmergic memories. Such QRFs rely on symmetries,
and hence on redundancy of encoded (or encodable) information; they depend, in other
words, on the availability of error-correcting codes [25, 156]. The implementation of space-
time as a quantum error-correcting code by TNs has been extensively studied by physicists;
see [157] for review and [98] for a detailed analysis using the present formalism. The use of
spacetime as an error-correcting code by organisms – e.g., the implementation of transla-
tional and rotational invariance of objects by dorsal visual processing in mammals [158, 159]
is well-understood phenomenologically, but the details of neural implementation remain
to be elucidated.

Both the context-sensitivity of, and the occurence of context effects due to non-commutativity
of QRFs in, control networks can be expected to increase with their complexity and hier-
archical depth. “Bowtie” networks with high fan-in/fan-out to/from multi-use proteins or
second messengers such as Ca2+ are increasingly recognized as ubiquitous in high eukary-
otic cells [160]. Such networks have the general for of the CCCD depicted in Diagram (3).
Frequently, such networks evolve via compression of information (e.g. toward share second
messengers, as in [Ca2+]-based interactions [161, 162]) as an efficiency-increasing mecha-
nism. Bowties introduce semantic ambiguities that must be resolved by context. Each
incoming signal has its own governing semantics, but the relevant context can depend on
boundary conditions which can be exceedingly difficult (if not impossible) to predetermine
(see e.g., [163, 164] for general discussions of the history and semantic depth of this prob-
lem). As pointed out in [22], a context change x → y is semantically problematic if for a
fixed set {0} of observations, the conditional probability distributions P(0₁|x) and P(oily)
are well defined, but the joint distribution P(0₁|x∨y) is not [106]. This occurs whenever
the QRFs for x and y do not commute [57, Th 7.1]. As suggested by Diagram (3), this
context-switching problem affects deep learning using VAEs [165]; see e.g., the application
to antimicrobial peptides in [166]. In general, the structure of Diagram (3) can serve as
a convenient benchmark for distinguishing signal transduction networks that incorporate
co-deployable versus non-co-deployable QRFs [57].

“Quantum” context effects due to non-commutativity have, interestingly, been reported
even at the scale of human language use. The “Snow Queen” experiment [167] challenged
subjects with distinct, mutually-inconsistent meanings of terms such as ‘kind', ‘evil', or
‘beautiful' in different contexts, and detected statistically-significant context effects using
the CbD formalism [62, 63]. Such effects cannot be explained by linguistic ambiguity,
misreading, etc. Such language-driven contextuality is taken up in the setting of psycholin-
guistics and distributional semantics in [168], which combines CbD and the sheaf theoretic
[60, 61] methods to systematically study semantic ambiguity as creating meaning/sense
discrepancies in statements like “It was about time”, “She had time on her hands to win

[PAGE 31]
the heat”, “West led with a queen", etc.

While the notion of “languages" has thus far been applied to cells, tissues, and even non-
vertebrates in a mostly metaphorical way, we can speculate that linguistic approaches to
understanding the interplay between context dependence and semantic ambiguity may be
useful to biology in general. Immune cells (e.g., T cells) are, for example, “programmed” or
"trained" by their progenitor cells to respond to local cellular signals and ambient conditions
in particular ways. Unexpected context changes may induce dysfunctional (at the organism
scale) responses, including chronic disorders [169]; these can be considered consequenes of
discrepancies between the “actual' semantics of incoming signals and the semantics expected
by the immune systems' “language.” This suggestion of possible “linguistic” contextuality
seems in consonance with the hypothesis of [170] that the immune system is a cognitive (liv-
ing) system implementing its exclusive system of language-grammar, which may be prone
to analogous disorders of communication as those discussed in [168]. Similar context effects
have been observed in microbiological systems [171]; here discrepancies in experimentally
derived classical probabilities arising from lactose-glucose interference signaling in E. Coli
can only be explained in terms of non-classical probabilities. We note that the expression
'quantum-like' [172] is often used for such effects; however, their formal structure is exactly
that given by quantum theory.

We expect that further research into quantum biology will unfold significant perspectives
on human/mammalian physiology and cognitive capabilities along the lines suggested in
the present article. For example, allostatic maintenance, as briefly alluded to in §2.1, can be
seen as a process regulating a body's physiological conditions relative to costs and benefits
while dynamically allocating resources for the purpose of overall adaptability of an organism
within its internal environment. Implementing the allostatic and anticipatory mechanisms
are the visceromotor cortical regions generating autonomic, hormonal, and immunological
predictions leading to interoceptive inference [68, 69, 70, 82, 173, 174, 176, 177]. This
process of inference in humans and mammals putatively utilizes predictive coding for the
processes of homeostasis-allostasis through a hierarchy of cellular to organ-level systems,
in turn connecting interoception to the processes of extercoception and proprioception
[82, 173, 177, 178, 179]. The basic principles follow from how allostasis provides protection
against potential surprise by utilizing a framework somewhat beyond the error signaling
necessary for homeostatic maintenance (it is essentially through minimizing the free energy
of internal state trajectories towards combatting surprise, as discussed in §2.1). The net
effect of the process is consonant with the Good Regulator theorem of [175], showing how
regulation of a given system requires an internal model of that system. A further perspective
is to emphasize the predictive nature of an integrated, complex, allostatic-interoceptive
cortical system capable of supporting a spectrum of psychological phenomena including
memory and emotions [177] (cf. [82]). Accordingly, cognitive conditions such as depression
and autism have been described as abnormalities of allostatic-interoceptive inference, so
impairing predictive coding mechanisms due to aberrant assimilation and mistuning of
prediction errors (putatively a connectivity issue), conceivably leading to a root cause of
many known cognitive conditions [82, 173, 178].


[PAGE 32]
We anticipate that this fully general, context sensitive model of control flow will be im-
portant for understanding morphogenesis, which is not simply a feed-forward emergent
system, but rather a highly context-sensitive error-minimizing process [23]. Specifically,
the collective intelligence of cells during embryonic development, organ regeneration, and
metamorphosis can create and repair specific complex structures despite a wide range of
perturbations [180]. Changes in the genome, the number of cells, or the starting configura-
tion can often be overcome: bisected embryos result in normal twins, amputated salamander
limbs re-grow back to normal, and planarian fragments result in perfect little worms [181].
The competency of cellular collectives to reach the correct target morphology despite even
drastic interventions requires an understanding of how they navigate, via context-sensitive
control flow, problem spaces including anatomical morphospace [182], physiological, and
transcriptional spaces [156, 183]. Understanding the navigation policies used by unconven-
tional collective intelligences can help not only understand creative problem-solving on rapid
timescales (such as the ability to regulate genes to accommodate an entirely novel stressor
[184] without evolutionary adaptation), but may also have implications for predicting and
managing the goals and behavioral repertoires of synthetic beings [185].

[PAGE 32] Conclusion
We have shown here how the problem of defining control flow arises in active inference
systems, and provided three formal representations of the problem. We have proved that
control flow in such systems can always be represented by a tensor network, provided
illustrative examples, and shown how the general formalism of topological quantum neural
networks can be used to implement a general model of control flow. These results provide
a general formalism with which to characterize context dependence in active inference
systems at any scale, from that of macromolecular pathways to that of multi-organism
communities. They suggest that the concept of communication by language is not just
metaphorical when applied to biological systems in general, but rather an appropriate and
productive description of interactional dynamics.

We view these results as a further step toward fully integrating the formal models, concepts,
and languages of physics, biology, and cognitive science. This integration is not reductive.
It rather allows us to classify systems using natural measures of organizational and com-
putational complexity, and to understand how interactions between simpler systems can
implement the more complex behavior of the larger systems that they compose.

[PAGE 32] Acknowledgements
K.F. is supported by funding for the Wellcome Centre for Human Neuroimaging (Ref:
205103/Z/16/Z), a Canada-UK Artificial Intelligence Initiative (Ref: ES/T01279X/1) and
the European Union's Horizon 2020 Framework Programme for Research and Innovation


[PAGE 33]
under the Specific Grant Agreement No. 945539 (Human Brain Project SGA3).Μ.L. grate-
fully acknowledges funding from the Guy Foundation and the John Templeton Foundation,
Grant 62230. A.M. wishes to acknowledge support by the Shanghai Municipality, through
the grant No. KBH1512299, by Fudan University, through the grant No. JJH1512105,
the Natural Science Foundation of China, through the grant No. 11875113, and by the
Department of Physics at Fudan University, through the grant No. IDH1512092/001.

[PAGE 33] Conflict of interest
The authors declare no competing, financial, or commercial interests in this research.

[PAGE 33] References (continued)

[11] Ramstead MJ, Sakthivadivel DAR, Heins C, Koudahl M, Millidge B, Da Costa L,
Klein B, Friston KJ 2022 On Bayesian mechanics: A physics of and by beliefs. Preprint
arXiv:2205.11543 [cond-mat.stat-mech].
[12] Fields C, Friston K, Glazebrook JF, Levin M 2022 A free energy principle for generic
quantum systems. Prog. Biophys. Mol. Biol. 173, 36-59.
[13] Friston, K., Da Costa, L., Sakthivadivel, D. A. R., Heins, C., Pavliotis, G. A., Ram-
stead, M., Parr, T. 2022 Path integrals, particular kinds, and strange things. Preprint
arXiv:2210.12761.
[14] Pearl, J. 1988 Probabilistic Reasoning in Intelligent Systems: Networks of Plausible
Inference. San Mateo CA: Morgan Kaufmann.
[15] Clark A. 2017 How to knit your own Markov blanket: Resisting the second law with
metamorphic minds. In (T. Wetzinger and W. Wiese, eds.) Philosophy and Predictive
Processing 3, 19pp. Frankfurt am Main: Mind Group.
[16] Kirchhoff, M., Parr, T., Palacios, E., Friston, K., Kiverstein, J. 2018 The Markov
blankets of life: Autonomy, active inference and the free energy principle. J. R. Soc.
Interface 15, 20170792.
[17] Parr, T., Da Costa, L., Friston, K. 2020 Markov blankets, information geometry and
stochastic thermodynamics. Philos. Trans. A: Math. Phys. Eng. Sci. 378, 20190159.
[18] Sakthivadivel, D.A.R. 2022 Weak Markov blankets in high-dimensional, sparsely-
coupled random dynamical systems. Preprint arXiv:2207.07620.
[19] Wheeler, J. H. 1989 Information, physics, quantum: The search for links. In: Zurek,
W. (Ed.), Complexity, Entropy, and the Physics of Information. CRC Press, Boca
Raton, FL, pp. 3-28.
[20] Levin, M. 2019 The computational boundary of a “self”: Developmental bioelectricity
drives multicellularity and scale-free cognition. Front. Psychol. 10, 1688.
[21] Levin, M. 2021 Life, death, and self: Fundamental questions of primitive cognition
viewed through the lens of body plasticity and synthetic organisms. Biochem. Biophys.
Res. Commun. 564, 114–133.
[22] Fields, C.; Glazebrook, J. F.; Levin, M. 2021 Minimal physicalism as a scale-free
substrate for cognition and consciousness. Neurosci. Cons. 7(2), niab013.
[23] Levin, M. 2022 Technological approach to mind everywhere: An experimentally-
grounded framework for understanding diverse bodies and minds. Front. Syst. Neu-
rosci. 16, 768201.
[24] Endsley, M. R. 2012 Situational awareness. In: Salvendy, G. (Ed.) Handbook of
Human Factors and Ergonomics, 4th Ed. Hoboken, NJ, John Wiley, pp. 553-568.
[25] Fields, C.; Levin, M. 2018 Multiscale memory and bioelectric error correction in the
cytoplasm-cytoskeleton-membrane system. WIRES Syst. Biol. Med. 10, e1410.
[26] Clark, A., Chalmers, D. 1998 The extended mind (Active externalism). Analysis
58(1), 7-19.
[27] Anderson, M. L. 2003 Embodied cognition: A field guide. Artif. Intell. 149, 91–130.
[28] Froese, T., Ziemke, T 2009 Enactive artificial intelligence: Investigating the systemic
organization of life and mind. Artif. Intell. 173, 466–500.
[29] Attias, H. 2003 Planning by probabilistic inference. Proc. of the 9th Int. Workshop
on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics in Proc. Machine Learning Res. R4, 9–16.
[30] Botvinick, M., Toussaint, M. 2012 Planning as inference. Trends Cogn. Sci. 16(10),
485-488.
[31] Lanillos, P., Mio, C., Pezzato, C., et al. 2021 Active inference in robotics and artificial
agents: Survey and challenges. Preprint arXiv:2112.01871.
[32] Chubukov, V., Gerosa, L., Kochanowski, K., Sauer, U. 2014 Coordination of microbial
metabolism. Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 12, 327-340.
[33] Micali, G., Endres, R. G. 2016 Bacterial chemotaxis: information processing, ther-
modynamics, and behavior. Curr. Opin. Microbiol. 30, 8–15.
[34] Pezzulo, G., LaPalme, J., Durant, F., Levin, M. 2021 Bistability of somatic pattern
memories: stochastic outcomes in bioelectric circuits underlying regeneration. Philos.
Trans. R. Soc. Lond. B 376(1821), 20190765.
[35] Blake, R., Logothetis, N. K. 2002 Visual competition. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 3, 1–11.
[36] Stertzer, P., Kleinschmidt, A., Rees, G. 2009 The neural bases of multistable percep-
tion. Trends Cogn. Sci. 13, 310-318.
[37] Schwartz, J.-L., Grimault, N., Hupé, J.-M., Moore, B. C. J., Pressnitzer, D. 2012
Multistability in perception: bindingsensory modalities, An overview. Phil. Trans. R.
Soc. Lond. B 367, 896-905.
[38] Vossel, S., Geng, J. J., Fink, G. R. 2014 Dorsal and ventral attention systems: Distinct
neural circuits but collaborative roles. Neuroscientist 20, 150-159.
[39] Baars, B. J., Franklin, S. 2003 How conscious experience and working memory inter-
act. Trends Cogn. Sci. 7, 166-172.
[40] Baars, B. J., Franklin, S., Ramsoy, T. Z. 2013 Global workspace dynamics: Cortical
"binding and propagation" enables conscious contents. Front. Psychol. 4, 200.
[41] Kuchling, F.; Fields, C.; Levin, M. 2022 Metacognition as a consequence of competing
evolutionary time scales. Entropy 24, 601.
[42] Parr, T., Friston, K. J. 2019 Generalised free energy and active inference. Biol. Cy-
bern. 113(5-6), 495-513.
[43] Winn, J. Bishop, С. М. 2005 Variational message passing. J. Mach. Learn. Res. 6,
661-694.
[44] Dauwels, J. 2007 On variational message passing on factor graphs. 2007 IEEE Inter-
national Symposium on Information Theory, Nice, France.
[45] Parr, T., Sajid, N., Friston, K. J. 2020 Modules or mean-fields? Entropy 22(5), 552.
[46] Da Costa, L., Parr, T. Sajid, N., Veselic, S., Neacsu, V., Friston, K. 2020 Active
inference on discrete state-spaces: A synthesis. J. Math. Psychol. 99, 102447.
[47] Friston, K., Parr, T., de Vries, B. 2017 The graphical brain: Belief propagation and
active inference. Netw. Neurosci. 1(4), 381–414.
[48] Orús, R. 2019 Tensor networks for complex quantum systems. Nat. Rev. Phys. 1,
538-550.
[49] Bao, N., Cao, C.-J., Carroll, S. M., Chatwin-Davies, A. 2017 de Sitter space as a
tensor network: Cosmic no-hair, complementarity, and complexity. Phys. Rev. D 96,
123536.
[50] Hu, Q., Vidal, G. 2017 Spacetime symmetries and conformal data in the continuous
Multiscale Entanglement Renormalization Ansatz. Phys. Rev. Lett. 119, 010603.
[51] Chandra, A. R., de Boer, J., Flory, M., Heller, M. P., Hörtner, S., Rolph, A. 2021
Spacetime as a quantum circuit. J. High Energy Phys. 2021, 207.
[52] Aharonov Y, Kaufherr T. Quantum frames of reference. Phys Rev D 1984;30:368-385.
[53] Bartlett SD, Rudolph T, Spekkens RW. 2007 Reference frames, super-selection rules,
and quantum information. Rev Mod Phys 79, 555–609.
[54] Barwise, J.; Seligman, J. 1997 Information Flow: The Logic of Distributed Systems
(Cambridge Tracts in Theoretical Computer Science 44). Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, UK.
[55] Fields, C.; Glazebrook, J. F. 2019 A mosaic of Chu spaces and Channel Theory I:
Category-theoretic concepts and tools. J. Expt. Theor. Artif. intell. 31, 177–213.
[56] Fields, C.; Glazebrook, J. F. 2020 Representing measurement as a thermodynamic
symmetry breaking. Symmetry 12, 810.
[57] Fields, C.; Glazebrook, J. F. 2022 Information flow in context-dependent hierarchical
Bayesian inference. J. Expt. Theor. Artif. intell. 34, 111–142.
[58] Fields, C.; Glazebrook, J. F.; Marcianò, A. 2021 Reference frame induced symmetry
breaking on holographic screens. Symmetry 13, 408.
[59] Fields, C.; Glazebrook, J. F.; Marcianò, A. (2022) Sequential measurements, topo-
logical quantum field theories, and topological quantum neural networks. Fortschr.
Phys. 2022, 2200104.
[60] Abramsky, S., Brandenburger, A. 2011 The sheaf-theoretic structure of non-locality
and contextuality. New J. Phys. 13, 113036.
[61] Abramsky, S., Barbosa, R. S., Mansfield, S. 2017 Contextual fraction as a measure
of contextuality. Phys. Rev. Lett. 119, 050504.
[62] Dzhafarov, E. N.; Kujala, J. V. (2017a). Contextuality-by-Default 2.0: Systems with
binary random variables. In: J. A. Barros, B. Coecke and E. Pothos (eds.) Lecture
Notes in Computer Science 10106, Springer, Berlin, 16-32.
[63] Dzharfarov, E. N. & Kon, M. 2018 On universality of classical probability with con-
textually labeled random varaibles. J. Math. Psychol. 85, 17–24.
[64] Adlam, E. 2021 Contextuality, fine-tuning and teleological explanation. Preprint
arXiv:2110.15898v2 [quant-ph].
[65] Marcianò, A.; Chen, D.; Fabrocini, F.; Fields, C.; Greco, E.; Gresnigt, N.; Jinklub,
K.; Lulli, M., Terzidis, K.; Zappala, E. 2022 Quantum neural networks and topological
quantum field theories. Neural Networks 153, 164–178.
[66] Marcianò, A., Chen, D., Fabrocini, F., Fields, C., Lulli, M., Zappala, E. 2022 Deep
neural networks as the semi-classical Limit of topological quantum neural networks:
The problem of generalisation. Preprint arXiv:2210.13741.
[67] Sterling, P., Eyer, J. 1988 Allostasis: A new paradigm to explain arousal pathology.
In: Handbook of Life Stress, Cognition and Health. John Wiley & Sons: New York,
pp. 629-649.
[68] Barrett, L. F., Quigley, K. S., Hamilton, P. 2016 An active inference theory of al-
lostasis and interoception in depression. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. B Biol. Sci.
371(1708), 20160011.
[69] Corcoran, A. W., Pezzulo, G., Hohwy, J. 2020 From allostatic agents to counterfactual
cognisers: Active inference, biological regulation, and the origins of cognition. Biol.
Philos. 35(3), 32.
[70] Hohwy, J. 2016 The self-evidencing brain. Noûs 50(2), 259-285.

[57] Fields, C.; Glazebrook, J. F. 2022 Information flow in context-dependent hierarchical
Bayesian inference. J. Expt. Theor. Artif. intell. 34, 111–142.
[58] Fields, C.; Glazebrook, J. F.; Marcianò, A. 2021 Reference frame induced symmetry
breaking on holographic screens. Symmetry 13, 408.
[59] Fields, C.; Glazebrook, J. F.; Marcianò, A. (2022) Sequential measurements, topo-
logical quantum field theories, and topological quantum neural networks. Fortschr.
Phys. 2022, 2200104.
[60] Abramsky, S., Brandenburger, A. 2011 The sheaf-theoretic structure of non-locality
and contextuality. New J. Phys. 13, 113036.
[61] Abramsky, S., Barbosa, R. S., Mansfield, S. 2017 Contextual fraction as a measure
of contextuality. Phys. Rev. Lett. 119, 050504.
[62] Dzhafarov, E. N.; Kujala, J. V. (2017a). Contextuality-by-Default 2.0: Systems with
binary random variables. In: J. A. Barros, B. Coecke and E. Pothos (eds.) Lecture
Notes in Computer Science 10106, Springer, Berlin, 16-32.
[63] Dzharfarov, E. N. & Kon, M. 2018 On universality of classical probability with con-
textually labeled random varaibles. J. Math. Psychol. 85, 17–24.
[64] Adlam, E. 2021 Contextuality, fine-tuning and teleological explanation. Preprint
arXiv:2110.15898v2 [quant-ph].
[65] Marcianò, A.; Chen, D.; Fabrocini, F.; Fields, C.; Greco, E.; Gresnigt, N.; Jinklub,
K.; Lulli, M., Terzidis, K.; Zappala, E. 2022 Quantum neural networks and topological
quantum field theories. Neural Networks 153, 164–178.
[66] Marcianò, A., Chen, D., Fabrocini, F., Fields, C., Lulli, M., Zappala, E. 2022 Deep
neural networks as the semi-classical Limit of topological quantum neural networks:
The problem of generalisation. Preprint arXiv:2210.13741.
[67] Sterling, P., Eyer, J. 1988 Allostasis: A new paradigm to explain arousal pathology.
In: Handbook of Life Stress, Cognition and Health. John Wiley & Sons: New York,
pp. 629-649.
[68] Barrett, L. F., Quigley, K. S., Hamilton, P. 2016 An active inference theory of al-
lostasis and interoception in depression. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. B Biol. Sci.
371(1708), 20160011.
[69] Corcoran, A. W., Pezzulo, G., Hohwy, J. 2020 From allostatic agents to counterfactual
cognisers: Active inference, biological regulation, and the origins of cognition. Biol.
Philos. 35(3), 32.
[70] Hohwy, J. 2016 The self-evidencing brain. Noûs 50(2), 259-285.
[71] Sakthivadivel, D. A. R. 2022 A constraint geometry for inference and integration.
Preprint arXiv:2203.08119.
[72] Sakthivadivel, D. A. R. 2022 Towards a geometry and analysis for Bayesian mechanics.
Preprint arXiv:2204.11900.
[73] Landauer, R. 1961 Irreversibility and heat generation in the computing process. IBM
J. Res. Dev. 5, 183-195.
[74] Jarzynski, C. 1997 Nonequilibrium equality for free energy differences. Phys. Rev.
Lett. 78(14), 2690-2693.
[75] Evans, D. J. 2003 A non-equilibrium free energy theorem for deterministic systems.
Molec. Phys 101(10), 1551–1554.
[76] Friston, K., Thornton, C., Clark, A. 2012 Free-energy minimization and the dark-
room problem. Front. Psychol. 3, 130.
[77] Pezzulo, G., Rigoli, F., Friston, K. 2015 Active Inference, homeostatic regulation and
adaptive behavioural control. Prog. Neurobiol. 134, 17–35.
[78] Friston, K., Rigole, F., Ognibene, D., Mathys, C., Fitzgerald, T., Pezzulo, G. 2015
Active inference and epistemic value. Cogn. Neurosci. 6, 187-214.
[79] Schmidhuber, J. 1991 Curious model-building control-systems. 1991 IEEE Interna-
tional Joint Conference on Neural Networks, Vols 1-3; 2, 1458-1463.
[80] Sun, Y., Gomez, F., Schmidhuber, J. 2011 Planning to be surprised: Optimal
Bayesian exploration in dynamic environments. Artificial General Intelligence. J.
Schmidhuber, K. R. Thórisson and M. Looks, Eds. Berlin, Heidelberg, Springer. pp.
41-51.
[81] Sengupta, B., Friston, K. 2018 How Robust are deep neural networks? Preprint arXiv
arXiv:1804.11313.
[82] Seth, A. K., Friston, K. J. 2016 Active interoceptive inference and the emotional
brain. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. B 371(1708), 20160007.
[83] Emmons-Bell, M., Durant, F., Hammelman, J. et al. 2015 Gap junctional blockade
stochastically induces different species-specific head anatomies in genetically wild-
type Girardia dorotocephala flatworms. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 16, 27865–27896.
[84] Oviedo, N. J., J. Morokuma, Walentek, P. et al. 2010 Long-range neural and gap
junction protein-mediated cues control polarity during planarian regeneration. Dev.
Biol. 339, 188-199.
[85] Tegmark M 2000 Importance of quantum decoherence in brain processes. Phys. Rev.
Е 61: 4194-4206.
[86] Schlosshauer M. 2007 Decohenece and the Quantum to Classical Transition. Springer,
Berlin.
[87] Zweir MC, Chong LT. 2010 Reaching biological timescales with all-atom molecular
dynamics simulations. Curr. Opin. Pharmacol. 10: 745–752.
[88] Marais A et al. 2018 The future of quantum biology. J. R. Soc. Interface 15: 20180640.
[89] Cao J et al. 2020 Quantum biology revisited. Science Adv. 6: eaaz4888.
[90] Kim, Y., Bertagna, F., D'Souza, E. M., Heyes, D. J., Johannissen, L. O., Nery, Е. Т.
2021 Quantum biology: an update and perspective. Quant. Rep. 3, 1-48.
[91] Baiardi, A., Christandl, M., Reiher, M. 2022 Quantum computing for molecular bi-
ology. Preprint arXiv:2212.12220.
[92] Fields, C.; Levin, M. 2021 Metabolic limits on classical information processing by
biological cells. BioSystems 209, 104513.
[93] Kerskens, C. M., Pérez, D. L. 2022 Experimental indications of non-classical brain
functions. J. Phys. Commun. 6, 105001.
[94] Fields, C.; Marcianò, A. 2019 Holographic screens are classical information channels.
Quant. Rep. 2, 326-336.
[95] Addazi, A.; Chen, P.; Fabrocini, F.; Fields, C.; Greco, E.; Lulli, M.; Marcianò,
A.; Pasechnik, R. 2021 Generalized holographic principle, gauge invariance and the
emergence of gravity à la Wilczek. Front. Astron. Space Sci. 8, 563450.
[96] Fields, C.; Glazebrook, J. F.; Marcianò, A. 2022 The physical meaning of the holo-
graphic principle. Quanta 11, 72–96.
[97] Pastawski, F.; Yoshida, B.; Harlow, D.; Preskill, J. 2015 Holographic quantum error-
correcting codes: Toy models for the bulk/boundary correspondence. J. High Energy
Phys. 6, 149.
[98] Fields, C.; Glazebrook, J. F.; Marcianò, A. 2023 LOCC protocols and QECCs from
the perspective of TQFT, in preparation.
[99] Landauer, R. 1999 Information is a physical entity. Physica A 263, 63-67.
[100] Bennett, C. H. 1982 The thermodynamics of computation. Int. J. Theor. Phys. 21,
905-940.
[101] Seifert, U. 2012 Stochastic thermodynamics, fluctuation theorems and molecular ma-
chines. Rep. Prog. Phys. 75, 126001.
[102] Atiyah, M. 1988 Topological quantum field theory. Pub. Math. IHÈS 68, 175-186.
[103] Chitambar, E., Leung, D., Mančinska, L., Ozols, M., Winter, A. 2014 Everything you
always wanted to know about LOCC (but were afraid to ask). Comms. Math. Phys.
328, 303-326.
[104] Tipler, F. 2014 Quantum nonlocality does not exist. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 111,
11281-11286.
[105] Bell, J. S. 1966 On the problem of hidden variables in quantum mechanics. Rev. Mod.
Phys. 38, 447-452.
[106] Kochen, S., Specker, E. P. 1967 The problem of hidden variables in quantum mechan-
ics. J. Math. Mech. 17, 59-87.
[107] Mermin, N. D. 1993 Hidden variables and the two theorems of John Bell. Rev. Mod.
Phys. 65, 803-815.
[108] Qi, X.-L. 2018 Does gravity come from quantum information? Nature Phys.14, 984-
987, https://doi.org/10.1038/s41567-018-0297-3.
[109] Bekenstein, J. D. Black holes and the second law. Lett. Nuovo Cim. 4, 737-740 (1972).
[110] Bekenstein, J. D. Black holes and entropy. Phys. Rev. D 7, 2333-2346 (1973).
[111] Hawking, S. W. Gravitational radiation from colliding black holes. Phys. Rev. Lett.
26, 1344-1346 (1971).
[112] Hawking, S. W. Black hole explosions? Nature 248, 30-31 (1974).
[113] Susskind, L. The world as a hologram. J. Math. Phys. 36, 6377-6396 (1995).
[114] Bousso, R. The holographic principle. Rev. Mod. Phys. 74, 825-874 (2002).
[115] 't Hooft, G. Dimensional reduction in quantum gravity. Preprint at
https://arxiv.org/abs/gr-qc/9310026 (1993).
[116] Maldacena, J. The large-N limit of superconformal field theories and supergravity.
Int. J. Theor. Phys. 38, 1113 (1999).
[117] Almheiri, A., Dong, X. and Harlow, D. Bulk locality and quantum error correction
in AdS/CFT. J. High Energy Phys. 2015, 163 (2015).
[118] Hubeny, V. E. and Rangamani, M. Causal holographic information. J. High Energy
Phys. 2012, 114 (2012).
[119] Headrick, M., Hubeny, V. E., Lawrence, A. and Rangamani, M. Causality and holo-
graphic entanglement entropy. J. High Energy Phys. 2014, 162 (2014).
[120] Swingle, B. Entanglement renormalization and holography. Phys. Rev. D 86, 065007
(2012).
[121] White, S. R. Density matrix formulation for quantum renormalization groups. Phys.
Rev. Lett. 69, 2863-2866 (1992).
[122] Verstraete, F., Murg, V. and Cirac, J. I. Matrix product states, projected entangled
pair states, and variational renormalization group methods for quantum spin systems.
Adv. Phys. 57, 143-224 (2008).
[123] DiVincenzo, D. P. et al. in Quantum Computing and Quantum Communications (ed.
Williams, C. P.) 247-257 (Springer, Berlin, 1999).
[124] Vidal, G. Class of quantum many-body states that can be efficiently simulated. Phys.
Rev. Lett. 101, 110501 (2008).
[125] Pastawski, F., Yoshida, B., Harlow, D. and Preskill, J. Holographic quantum error-
correcting codes: toy models for the bulk/boundary correspondence. J. High Energy
Phys. 2015, 149 (2015).
[126] Yang, Z., Hayden, P. and Qi, X.-L. Bidirectional holographic codes and sub-AdS
locality. J. High Energy Phys. 2016, 175 (2016).
[127] Hayden, P. et al. Holographic duality from random tensor networks. J. High Energy
Phys. 2016, 9 (2016).
[128] Han, M. and Huang, S. Discrete gravity on random tensor network and holographic
Rényi entropy. J. High Energy Phys. 2017, 148 (2017).
[129] Lashkari, N., McDermott, M. B. and Van Raamsdonk, M. Gravitational dynamics
from entanglement “thermodynamics". J. High Energy Phys. 2014, 195 (2014).
[130] Swingle, B. and Van Raamsdonk, M. Universality of gravity from entanglement.
Preprint at https://arxiv.org/abs/1405.2933 (2014).
[131] Shenker, S. H. and Stanford, D. Black holes and the butterfly effect. J. High Energy
Phys. 2014, 67 (2014).
[132] Sachdev, S. and Ye, J. Gapless spin-fluid ground state in a random quantum Heisen-
berg magnet. Phys. Rev. Lett. 70, 3339-3342 (1993).
[133] Kitaev, A. A simple model of quantum holography. KITP http://online.kitp.
ucsb.edu/online/entangled15/kitaev/; http://online.kitp.ucsb.edu/online/ entan-
gled15/kitaev2/ (2015).
[134] Maldacena, J. and Stanford, D. Remarks on the Sachdev-Ye-Kitaev model. Phys.
Rev. D 94, 106002 (2016).
[135] Smith, J. E., Nair, R. 2005 The architecture of virtual machines. IEEE Computer
38(5), 32-38.

[121] White, S. R. Density matrix formulation for quantum renormalization groups. Phys.
Rev. Lett. 69, 2863-2866 (1992).
[122] Verstraete, F., Murg, V. and Cirac, J. I. Matrix product states, projected entangled
pair states, and variational renormalization group methods for quantum spin systems.
Adv. Phys. 57, 143-224 (2008).
[123] DiVincenzo, D. P. et al. in Quantum Computing and Quantum Communications (ed.
Williams, C. P.) 247-257 (Springer, Berlin, 1999).
[124] Vidal, G. Class of quantum many-body states that can be efficiently simulated. Phys.
Rev. Lett. 101, 110501 (2008).
[125] Pastawski, F., Yoshida, B., Harlow, D. and Preskill, J. Holographic quantum error-
correcting codes: toy models for the bulk/boundary correspondence. J. High Energy
Phys. 2015, 149 (2015).
[126] Yang, Z., Hayden, P. and Qi, X.-L. Bidirectional holographic codes and sub-AdS
locality. J. High Energy Phys. 2016, 175 (2016).
[127] Hayden, P. et al. Holographic duality from random tensor networks. J. High Energy
Phys. 2016, 9 (2016).
[128] Han, M. and Huang, S. Discrete gravity on random tensor network and holographic
Rényi entropy. J. High Energy Phys. 2017, 148 (2017).
[129] Lashkari, N., McDermott, M. B. and Van Raamsdonk, M. Gravitational dynamics
from entanglement “thermodynamics". J. High Energy Phys. 2014, 195 (2014).
[130] Swingle, B. and Van Raamsdonk, M. Universality of gravity from entanglement.
Preprint at https://arxiv.org/abs/1405.2933 (2014).
[131] Shenker, S. H. and Stanford, D. Black holes and the butterfly effect. J. High Energy
Phys. 2014, 67 (2014).
[132] Sachdev, S. and Ye, J. Gapless spin-fluid ground state in a random quantum Heisen-
berg magnet. Phys. Rev. Lett. 70, 3339-3342 (1993).
[133] Kitaev, A. A simple model of quantum holography. KITP http://online.kitp.
ucsb.edu/online/entangled15/kitaev/; http://online.kitp.ucsb.edu/online/ entan-
gled15/kitaev2/ (2015).
[134] Maldacena, J. and Stanford, D. Remarks on the Sachdev-Ye-Kitaev model. Phys.
Rev. D 94, 106002 (2016).
[135] Smith, J. E., Nair, R. 2005 The architecture of virtual machines. IEEE Computer
38(5), 32-38.
[136] Manevitz, L. M., Yousef, M. 2002 One-class SVMs for document classification. J.
Mach. Learn. Res. 2, 139–154.
[137] Kosko, B. 1988 Bidirectional associative memories. IEEE Trans. Syst. Man Cybern.
18, 49-60.
[138] J. Baez, Lett. Math. Phys. 1996, 38, 129.
[139] Rovelli, C. Quantum Gravity, Cambridge University Press, Cam- bridge, UK 2004.
[140] Fields, C. Glazebrook, F. and Marcianò, A. Sequential Measurements, Topological
Quantum Field Theories, and Topological Quantum Neural Networks, Fortschr. Phys.
2022, 2200104.
[141] Parisi, G. and Wu, Y.-S. Perturbation theory without gauge fix-
ing, Scientia Sinica 24, 483 (1981); doi: 10.1360/ya1981-24-4-483,
http://engine.scichina.com/doi/10.1360/ya1981-24-4-483.
[142] Lulli, M., Marcianò, A. and Shan, X. Stochastic Quantization of General Relativity
à la Ricci-Flow, [arXiv:2112.01490 [gr-qc]].
[143] Marcianò, A. in preparation.
[144] Sengupta, R. Adhikary, S. Oseledets, I. and Biamonte, J. Tensor Networks in Machine
Learning, https://arxiv.org/pdf/2207.02851.pdf, 2022.
[145] E. Miles Stoudenmire, Talk at the International Center for Theoretical Physics Tri-
este, August 2018.
[146] Stoudenmire, E.M. Schwab, D.J. Supervised Learning with Quantum-Inspired Tensor
Networks, https://arxiv.org/abs/1605.05775, 2016.
[147] Novikof, A. Trofimov, M. and Oseledets, I. Exponential Machines,
https://arxiv.org/abs/1605.03795, 2017.
[148] Glasser, I. Pancotti, N. and Cirac, J.I. From probabilistic graphical models to gen-
eralized tensor networks for supervised learning, https://arxiv.org/abs/1806.05964,
2018.
[149] Han, Z.-H. Wang, J. Fan, H. Wang, L. and Zhang, P. Unsupervised Generative Mod-
eling Using Matrix Product States, in Physical Review X, 8, 2018.
[150] Liu, J. Li, S.-J. Zhang, J. and Zhang, P. Tensor networks for unsupervised machine
learning, https://arxiv.org/abs/2106.12974, 2021.
[151] Convy, I. and Whaley, K.B. Interaction Decompositions for Tensor Network Regres-
sion, https://arxiv.org/abs/2208.06029, 2022.
[152] Groenhof, G. 2013 Introduction to QM/MM simulations. Methods Mol. Biol. 924,
43-66.
[153] Ledezma-Tejeida, D.; Schastnaya, E.; Sauer, U. 2021 Metabolism as a signal generator
in bacteria. Curr. Opin. Syst. Biol. 28, 100404.
[154] Fields, C.; Friston, K.; Glazebrook, J. F.; Levin, M.; Marcianò, A. 2022 The free
energy principle induces neuromorphic development. Neuromorph. Comp. Engin. 2,
042002.
[155] Fields, C.; Glazebrook, J. F.; Levin, M. 2022 Neurons as hierarchies of quantum
reference frames. Biosystems 219, 104714.
[156] Fields, C., Levin, M. 2022 Competency in navigating arbitrary spaces as an invariant
for analyzing cognition in diverse embodiments. Entropy 24, 819.
[157] Bain, J. 2020 Spacetime as a quantum error-correcting code? Stud. Hist. Phil. Mod.
Phys. 71, 26-36.
[158] Flombaum, J. I.; Scholl, B. J.; Santos, L. R. 2008 Spatiotemporal priority as a fun-
damental principle of object persistence. In: The Origins of Object Knowledge, eds
B. Hood and L. Santos (Oxford: Oxford University Press), 135–164.
[159] Fields, C. 2011 Trajectory recognition as the basis for object individuation: A func-
tional model of object file instantiation and object-token encoding. Front. Psychol. 2,
49.
[160] Niss, K.; Gomez-Casado, C.; Hjaltelin, J. X.; Joeris, T.; Agace, W. W.; Belling, K.
G.; Brunak, S. 2020 Complete topological mapping of a cellular protein interactome
reveals bow-tie motifs as ubiquitous connectors of protein complexes. Cell Rep. 31,
107763.
[161] Carafoli, E. and Krebs, J. Why calcium? How clacium became the best communica-
tor. J. Biol Chem 40 2016, 20849-20857.
[162] Polouliakh, N., Nock, R., Nielsen, F. and Kitano, H. G-protein coupled receptor
siganling architecture of mammalian immune cells. PLoS ONE 4(1) 2009, e4189.
[163] Friedlander, T., Mayo, A. E., Tlusty, T. and Alon. U. Evolution of bow-tie architec-
tures in biology. PLOS Computational Biology 11(3) 2015, e1004055
[164] Boniolo. G., D'Agostino, M., Plazza, M. and Pulcini, G. Molecular biology
meets logic: Context-senstivity in focus. Foundations of Science 2021 in press,
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10699-021-09789-y
[165] Kingma, D. P and Welling, M. An Introduction to variational autoencoders. Foun-
dations and Trends in Machine Learning 12(4) (2019), 307-392.
[166] Dean, S. N. and Walper, S. A. Variational autoenecoder for generation of antimicro-
bial peptides. ACS Omega 5 2020, 20746–20754.
[167] Cervantes, V. H., Dzhafarov, E. N. (2018). Snow Queen is evil and beautiful: Ex-
perimental evidence for probabilistic contextuality in human choices. Decision 5(3),
193-204.
[168] Wang, D., Sadrzadeh, Abramsky, S. and Cervantes, V. H. On the quantum-like con-
textulaity of ambiguous phrases. Proceedings of the 2021 Workshop on Semantic
Spaces at the Intersection of NLP, Physics and Cognitive Science, pp. 42–52. As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics 2021.
[169] Editorial Focus. 2019 A matter of context. Nature Immunol. 20, 769.
[170] Atlan, H. and Cohen, I. R. 1998 Immune information, self-organiztion and meaning.
Int. Immunology 10, 711–717.
[171] Basieva I, Khrennikov A, Ohya M, Yamato O. Quantum-like interference effect in gene
expression: glucose-lactose destructive interference. Syst Synth Biol 2011;5:59–68.
[172] Khrennikov, A. Quantum-like modeling of cognition. Front Phys 3 2015:77.
[173] Barrett, L. F., and Simmons, W. K. (2015) Interoceptive predictions in the brain.
Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 16(7): 419-429.
[174] Barrett, L. F. The theory of constructed emotion: an active inference account of
interoception and categorization. Soc. Cogn. Affect. Neurosci. 12 2017, 1–23.
[175] Conant RC, Ashby WR. Every good regulator of a system must be a model of that
system. Int. J. Syst. Sci. 1970;1(2):89–97.
[176] Hohwy, J. The Predictive Mind. Oxford University Press, Oxford, UK, 2013
[177] Kleckner, I. R. et al. Evidence for a large-scale brain system supporting allostasis and
interoception in humans. Nature Human Behaviour 11 2017, Article 0069, 14 pages.
[178] Seth, A. K., Suzuki, K, and Critchley, H. D. An interoceptive predictive coding model
of conscious presence. Frontiers in Psychology 2 Article 395, 16 pages.
[179] Seth, A. K. (2013) Interoceptive inference, emotion, and the embodied self. Trends
in Cognitive Science 17 (11): 565-573.
[180] Pezzulo, G., Levin, M. 2016 Top-down models in biology: explanation and control
of complex living systems above the molecular level. J. R. Soc. Interface 13(124),
20160555.
[181] Birnbaum, K. D., Sánchez Alvarado, A. 2008 Slicing across kingdoms: Regeneration
in plants and animals. Cell 132(4), 697-710.
[182] Levin, M. 2022 Collective intelligence of morphogenesis as a teleonomic process.
Preprint PsyArXiv hqc9b.
[183] Biswas, S., Clawson, W., Levin, M. 2023 Learning in transcriptional network models:
Computational discovery of pathway-level memory and effective interventions. int. J.
Molec. Sci. 24(1), 285.
[184] Emmons-Bell, M., Durant, F., Tung, A. et al. 2019 Regenerative adaptation to elec-
trochemical perturbation in planaria: A molecular analysis of physiological plasticity.
iScience 22, 147-165.
[185] Clawson, W., Levin, M. 2022 Endless forms most beautiful 2.0: Teleonomy and the
bioengineering of chimaeric and synthetic organisms. Biol. J. Linnean Soc. 2022,
blac073.

[182] Levin, M. 2022 Collective intelligence of morphogenesis as a teleonomic process.
Preprint PsyArXiv hqc9b.
[183] Biswas, S., Clawson, W., Levin, M. 2023 Learning in transcriptional network models:
Computational discovery of pathway-level memory and effective interventions. int. J.
Molec. Sci. 24(1), 285.
[184] Emmons-Bell, M., Durant, F., Tung, A. et al. 2019 Regenerative adaptation to elec-
trochemical perturbation in planaria: A molecular analysis of physiological plasticity.
iScience 22, 147-165.
[185] Clawson, W., Levin, M. 2022 Endless forms most beautiful 2.0: Teleonomy and the
bioengineering of chimaeric and synthetic organisms. Biol. J. Linnean Soc. 2022,
blac073.