[PAGE 1] An in vivo brain-bacteria interface: the developing brain as a key regulator of innate immunity

Infections have numerous effects on the brain. However, possible roles of the brain in protecting against infection, and the developmental origin and role of brain signaling in immune response, are largely unknown. We exploited a unique Xenopus embryonic model to reveal control of innate immune response to pathogenic *E. coli* by the developing brain. Using survival assays, morphological analysis of innate immune cells and apoptosis, and RNA-seq, we analyzed combinations of infection, brain removal, and tail-regenerative response. Without a brain, survival of embryos injected with bacteria decreased significantly. The protective effect of the developing brain was mediated by decrease of the infection-induced damage and of apoptosis, and increase of macrophage migration, as well as suppression of the transcriptional consequences of the infection, all of which decrease susceptibility to pathogen. Functional and pharmacological assays implicated dopamine signaling in the bacteria-brain-immune crosstalk. Our data establish a model that reveals the very early brain to be a central player in innate immunity, identify the developmental origins of brain-immune interactions, and suggest several targets for immune therapies.

[PAGE 1] INTRODUCTION

Innate immunity provides a first line of defense against pathogens¹ and plays a crucial role in initiating adaptive immune responses. Most of the cell types of hematopoietic origin and genes known to be involved in mammalian innate and adaptive immunity have been identified in *X. laevis*,3,4 making the frog model an important emerging tool for understanding the cell and molecular biology of immunity.1,5,6 The immune response in the Xenopus embryo is provided uniquely by innate immunity during the first 12 days (d) post-fertilization, allowing studies of response to infection by a wide range of pathogens without the confounding influences of the adaptive immune component.5,8-11

An important emerging field concerns bidirectional intercommunication between two 'super-systems', the immune response and the brain, with implications for both basic evolutionary/cell biology and for biomedicine.12-14 Cytokines and other inflammation-related molecules affect vagal afferents or directly on the brain, controlling aspects of behavior.15 Exciting recent studies integrating cognitive endpoints and cell biology of lymphatic vessels in the mature brain reveal the link between immune cells and brain functions.2,16-19 These studies reveal the adult brain as a regulator of adaptive immune response. e.g.,20,21 The immune system has been proposed as a 'seventh sense',22 receiving information from pathogen agents to inform the central nervous system. Studies using invertebrate models suggest that neural circuits receive and integrate stimuli coming from pathogens, via G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs), to guide the immune response.23-25

Several key open questions remain in this fascinating field. First, while much work has been done on the role of the CNS in adaptive immunity, the interplay between brain and innate immunity is still poorly understood. Second, most of the data come from adult organisms, and the developmental origins of brain-immune interactions are largely mysterious. Last, an obvious limitation of mammalian models is the difficulty of performing loss-of-function studies that unequivocally show that the brain controls the immune system.1,26 To address these knowledge gaps, and to identify intervention strategies for innate immune function, we exploited a unique system for probing the interactions of brain and immunity in embryogenesis under normal conditions and when challenged with human pathogenic bacteria.

We developed a Xenopus model in which we could study brain-dependent events in embryogenesis: the brain is removed during early embryonic stages, but the animal can be kept alive and development continues. The ability of this vertebrate, a popular model for numerous biomedical contexts,27-34 to survive and develop without a brain provides a unique opportunity to understand the role of the brain in diverse systems-level outcomes. Our prior research into brain-dependent developmental signaling revealed that the nascent brain, even before being fully formed, plays an instructive role in patterning somitic muscle and peripheral neural networks.35,36 Here, we use this brainless vertebrate model, with intact spinal cord and peripheral innervation, to demonstrate an unknown role of the brain: regulating the early innate immunity in the presence or absence of infection. Our data, synthesizing a molecular comparison of infected and uninfected animals under normal, brainless, and tail-regenerative conditions, reveal the profound influence of the brain, in part mediated by dopamine signaling, upon susceptibility and response to pathogenic challenge at the cellular, molecular, and organism-wide levels.


[PAGE 2] RESULTS

Having a brain protects against infections

We previously showed that the uropathogenic *E. coli* UTI89 readily colonizes *X. laevis* embryos when infected at blastula or gastrula stages, and that survival rates at 4–5 days after infection could be used as a readout of the degree of activation of the innate immune system. Here, we investigated the role of brain-derived signals in innate immunity and susceptibility by asking how animals respond to systemic infection in the absence of a brain (Fig. 1a).

Bacteria were injected into the blastocoel of embryos at 4.5 × 10³ ± 7.8 × 10³ cfu/embryo. First, we evaluated the survival rates at stage 48 (4–5 d after infection) for embryos subjected to the different infection conditions: infected with *E. coli* UT189 (UTI condition) vs. not-infected (NI condition), belonging to each intervention or experimental group at st. 25 (Fig. 1b-e, [PAGE 3] Supplementary Fig. S1): intact brain or control embryos (Control or Ctrl; Fig. 1b, c), brain removal (brainless or BR; Fig. 1d, e; Supplementary Fig. S1a, b), resection of a piece of cervical spinal cord (SC; Supplementary Fig. S1c, d), tail-bud amputation (Tailless or Tail), and muscle lysis via Simvastatin treatment (Simv; Supplementary Fig. S1h, j). At least, five biological replicates or dishes of embryos (r = 5, n = 40 embryos per replicate, N total = 200 embryos) were used per each group. Results were consistent among the replicates for each condition and group. For NI embryos, survival rates were similar among groups, ranging from 92 to 100% (99 ± 1% for Ctrl, 96 ± 3% for BR, 99 ± 1% for SC, 99 ± 1% for Tail, and 97 ± 5% for Simv; one-way ANOVA P > 0.05; r = 5 per group; Fig. 1f), suggesting any further differences among groups cannot be due to the surgical intervention itself. *E. coli* infection caused significant differences in the survival rates among groups (one-way ANOVA P < 0.01; Fig. 1g), indicating its utility as an infection-survival assay. For intact or Ctrl embryos, the mean infection-survival rate was 50 ± 20% (r = 8). Tail animals expressed significantly higher survival rates with respect to Ctrl (71 ± 14%, Bonferroni's posttest P = 0.018, r = 8), apparently resulting from the induced regenerative response.9,37 Conversely, infected animals developing without a brain (BR) exhibited a low survival rate, with a significant drop to 16 ± 8% (Bonferroni's posttest P < 0.0001, r = 8). The survival rate for SC embryos (37 ± 15%) was not significantly different than the Ctrl group (P > 0.9999, r = 8), indicating that the effect was not due simply to surgical damage or the requirement for an intact CNS overall. As a control for possible effects of general tissue distress on outcomes, and to ascertain the potential impact of muscle structure on survival phenotypes,36 we tested Simvastatin treatment (Simv; Supplementary Fig. S1h-j). Simvastatin is a drug well-known to give severe collateral myotoxic effects in human patients38 and zebrafish embryos.39,40 It induces muscle disorganization similar to that observed after brain removal in Xenopus embryos, allowing independent characterization of the effects of brain removal vs. muscle tissue lysis and disorganization. The Simv group's survival was similar to that of Ctrl (52 ± 9%; P > 0.9999, r = 5), demonstrating that the survival capacity and susceptibility to bacterial infection are not non-specifically modulated by a stressful combination of infection and a strong tissue stressor.

We next wanted to ensure that the effects of the brain ablation were not due to the removal of migrating neural crest cells (NC; Supplementary Fig. S1e-g). Survival after NC ablation in the absence of infection was similar to the other groups, 98 ± 3% (r = 3, n = 40, N = 120), without any significant death related to the intervention itself. UTI infection in NC embryos led to a mean survival rate of 60 ± 13% (r = 3, n = 40, N = 120), similar to that reached in Ctrl animals (61 ± 30%; r = 3, n = 40, N = 120) and significantly different from the BR group (11 ± 12%; r = 3, n = 40, N = 120; one-way ANOVA P < 0.05; Bonferroni's test for NC vs. Ctrl P = 0.9365; NC vs. BR P = 0.458). Of the several tissues and organs we targeted, surgically and via lytic toxins, the brain was unique in its effects in promoting survival.

To further characterize the role of the brain in modulating overall susceptibility to bacterial infection, we assessed the bacterial load in living embryos within each experimental group at 2 d after infection. Microbial analysis showed that the pathogen load was maintained among the different experimental groups, with an average of 3.24 × 10⁶ cfu/ml (one-way ANOVA P > 0.05; Fig. 1h: the average initial dose of UTI *E. coli* injected was 4.5 × 10³ cfu/ml). Since the presence of the brain improves survival but does not significantly reduce pathogen load, we analyzed our groups with an HPRI metric—an index that takes into account pathogen load as well as survival (Fig. 1i). Differences in the HPRI index demonstrated that developing without an intact Central Nervous System (CNS; brain or spinal cord) significantly decreases tolerance41,42 and increases the susceptibility to infection (one-way ANOVA P < 0.01). Taken together, the results demonstrate the unique effects of brain removal on susceptibility to infection: survival depends on the presence of the brain regardless of any tissue injury, and the absence of the brain makes embryos likely to succumb to bacterial infection.

[PAGE 3] Early brain protects against the infection-induced apoptosis

To understand the increased susceptibility to infection in BR animals, we conducted a longitudinal assay, scoring survival rates and characterizing apoptosis at several time points after infection and surgery (r = 3, N = 120 per group; Fig. 2a, b). Embryos were analyzed at 2–4 h post-surgery (hps; corresponding to st. 26–27), 8 hps (st. 30), 24 hps (st. 35), 36 hps (st. 40), 48 hps (st. 42), and the end stage-48 time point (4 days ps). For all groups, the first wave of death was detected at 24 hps (or 36 h post-infection, hpi; Supplementary Table S1), especially for BR animals, which went from 87 ± 6% at st. 30 to 54 ± 12% at st. 35 (two-way ANOVA P < 0.01; Bonferroni's posttest P = 0.0005 for BR st. 25 vs. st. 35). For Ctrl animals, this peak (or first time point with significant differences with respect to st. 25) was reached at st. 40 (48 hpi), with a drop in the survival rate to 68 ± 23%. At st. 40, BR animals showed a dramatically decreased survival rate (19 ± 7%), leading to significant differences with the rest of the groups, which kept constant until the end of the experiment (Bonferroni's posttest P < 0.01 for BR vs. C; see Supplementary Table S1 for over-time values at each stage and per each group). To characterize the cellular mechanisms behind the infection-induced death, we studied the patterning and number of apoptotic cells in Ctrl and BR animals at the same longitudinal period (Fig. 2b). We used the antibody against Cleaved Caspase-3 (Asp175; CC3, which detects levels of activated caspase-3) as it has been extensively shown to be a reliable marker for apoptosis in Xenopus embryos.43-45 For both Ctrl and BR groups, apoptosis followed a successive positive [PAGE 4] slope from st. 26–27, reaching a peak at st. 35, when significant differences are found in the number of cells between them (41 ± 11 vs. 55 ± 11 CC3-positive cells per area in Ctrl vs. BR, respectively; two-way ANOVA P < 0.01; Bonferroni's posttest P = 0.0018; Fig. 2c, d). Morphological analysis of CC3 expression revealed that UTI Infection seems to affect mostly the gut region, characterized by a focus of high reactivity to the CC3 marker, which is focused on a posterior domain in Ctrl animals and occupying a more extensive area in BR embryos (Fig. 2c, d). Animals at later stages in both groups expressed abnormalities in this region, but with decreased apoptosis, pointing to this damage in the digestive domain as indicative of the UTI infection and defining the lethal consequences of infection to occur during the first 48 hpi. From st. 35, apoptosis starts to decrease, being constant and without differences between groups until the end of the experiment (Fig. 2e, f). Taken together, these results show that death after infection-surgery occurs sequentially over time, as a direct consequence of increased weakness, and it does not happen in the first immediate hours after surgery (st. 26–30). Interestingly, this analysis also shows that the peak of death in the absence of the brain [PAGE 5] occurs 24 h earlier than when the brain is present (at st. 35 vs. st. 40), with a significantly increased apoptosis, supporting the protective effects of the brain against the lethal consequences of the infection.

Brain signaling does not affect primitive myeloid precursors

Next, we asked whether the protective effects of the brain were due to action on the development of the primitive immune system (regardless of infection, as it does with muscle and nerve development) or whether, conversely, the brain acted on the active response to infection (implying differences between Control and BR animals only after infection). In Xenopus, the earliest known marker of the primitive myeloid is *spib-a* (*spiba*). *Spib-* is a highly conserved ETS transcription factor that marks the primitive myeloid-cell lineage and is required for its development.3,10 *spib* expression in myeloid precursors has been characterized in Xenopus,10 mouse,46 and humans.47 To specifically probe the role of the brain in establishing key cell types involved in innate immunity, we studied the *spiba*-positive cells in UTI and NI early-staged embryos (st. 28), subjected to the different surgical interventions (Ctrl, BR, SC, Tail; Supplementary Fig. S2). To compare the prevalence and spatial distribution of the *spiba*-positive cell population, we characterized four independent regions: face, tail, dorsal flank, and ventral flank. At least, ten different embryos, from different replicates, per each group and condition were used for quantification (r = 3, n = 40, N = 120; Supplementary Fig. S2a, b, t-w and Methods for details of quantification). NI embryos belonging to each experimental group possessed a similar number and distribution of positive cells, mainly located in the ventral region or hematopoietic organ at these stages (Supplementary Fig. S2c, d). In NI embryos, the only intervention that resulted in significant differences at the site of injury from intact embryos was tail-bud amputation (one-way ANOVA P < 0.05; Bonferroni's posttest P = 0.032; Supplementary Fig. S2f). The number of *spiba+* cells in Tail animals was especially higher in the posterior regions, occupying the bud and amputation plane. No differences from Ctrl embryos were detected for any area in BR animals, suggesting the brain, in the absence of infection, is not necessary to maintain this population of primitive myeloid precursors.

Next, we analyzed the same cell population in embryos that were previously infected with *E. coli* UTI89 (UTI condition; Supplementary Fig. S2j-n). Neither intervention (brain, SC, or tail removal) nor body region showed significant differences in the number of *spiba+* cells within infected embryos. Comparing effects of the infection on the number of cells within each experimental group (Supplementary Fig. S2o-r), we detected a significant decrease in the total number of myeloid precursors as a consequence of bacteria injection for all experimental conditions (two-way ANOVA P < 0.05). This generic drop detected in st. 28 embryos indicates that infection with the human uropathogenic *E. coli* affects the primitive myeloid cells at early stages of immune system development. Intriguingly, tail amputation performed after infection, which showed the highest survival rates, did not induce a higher proliferation of *spiba+* cells, suggesting that the higher survival percentage observed in this group might not be due to the presence of more myeloid progenitor cells.

Taken together, our results reveal the negative impact of infection at very early embryonic stages and demonstrate that the positive contribution of the brain to surviving infection is not mediated by brain-induced changes in the number of early myeloid-cell precursors.

Brain is required for migratory response of macrophages

Considering that the early brain does not control the primitive formation of myeloid cells at early stages, we decided to evaluate the dynamic behavior or migration of immune cells at later stages. We labeled a gene coding for a protein expressed by Xenopus embryonic macrophages, *mmp7*, that mediates extracellular matrix remodeling, a crucial aspect of their migration.11,48 Homologs of this gene-protein have been extensively used to study macrophage behavior.10,11,48 *mmp7*-ISH was performed for the four experimental groups (Ctrl, BR, SC, Tail) per each infection condition (UTI vs. NI) in st. 36 embryos. At least, ten different embryos, from different replicates, per each group and condition were used for quantification (r = 3, n = 40, N = 120; Fig. 3). In the absence of infection (NI, Fig. 3c-g), the *mmp7+* population was only significantly different at the injury site for Tail animals, as seen with the earlier myeloid *spiba+* cells, with an increased number of *mmp7+* cells accumulated in the bud tail or amputation plane with respect to Ctrl embryos (one-way ANOVA P < 0.01; Bonferroni's posttest P < 0.0001; Fig. 3d). No differences were detected for any area between Ctrl and BR animals, suggesting that the brain, in the absence of infection, does not affect macrophage migration in the developing embryo. However, in embryos infected early in development with *E. coli* (UTI, Fig. 3h-l), the absence of the brain led to a significant increase in the number of *mmp7+* cells in ventral areas with respect to Ctrl animals (one-way ANOVA P < 0.05; Bonferroni's posttest P = 0.0464 for BR vs. Ctrl at the ventral area; Fig. 3k), represented by the accumulation of this population along the ventral hematopoietic niche (Fig. 3m, n). The ventral clumping of *mmp7*-positive cells in BR after infection was not detected in SC and Tail embryos, resulting in significant differences between BR and Tail groups (Bonferroni's posttest P = 0.0225 for BR vs. Tail at the ventral area; Fig. 3k), and demonstrating that the effect was not due simply to surgical damage or the need for an intact CNS.

The intragroup comparisons (Fig. 3o-r), analyzing embryos from the same surgery intervention but infected vs. not-infected conditions, and similarly to the *spiba+* population, demonstrated that the overall number of *mmp7+* cells was lower in infected embryos, regardless of experimental intervention. This result confirms that the human uropathogenic *E. coli* targets the early innate immune system. Interestingly, the differences previously detected between Ctrl and Tail embryos in the tail area injury site, due to the tail injury itself, with a significant macrophage mobilization to the amputation plane (tail-bud area) observable only in the absence of infection (Fig. 3d vs. Fig. 3i), were also displayed when comparing the effects of infection within the Tail group (Fig. 3r). A significant difference in the number of macrophages at the tail region or amputation site is detected between not-infected and UTI-infected Tail embryos (Bonferroni's posttest P = 0.0487 for Tail NI vs. Tail UTI at the tail region), indicating that the macrophage accumulation to the amputation plane in this group is entirely impaired in the presence of bacterial infection. Our results show that the absence of the brain during development leads to defects in the response against infection, specifically the accumulation of *mmp7+* cells in the ventral niche reveals defects in macrophage migration.

[PAGE 5] Brainless induces ectopic myeloid and neural networks

Given the observed effects of the brain on the response of the developing innate immune system (~st. 30), we next analyzed effects of the brain's presence on the fully-developed innate system5,7,49-51 and the surrounding innervation, in embryos at later stages of development (~st. 44-48; see Supplementary Note 1 for more details about embryogenesis of the immune system in Xenopus). Immunofluorescence using the XL-2 antibody revealed the distribution of all Xenopus leukocytes (monoclonal antibodies specific for particular leukocyte subpopulations are not currently available for these species). We quantified XL2+ cells along the middle and posterior parts of the animal body in not-infected and infected st. 44-45 Ctrl, BR, SC, Tail, and Simv embryos (Fig. 4a-h). In addition, we included the NC group in the XL2 analysis to study whether this intervention led to similar [PAGE 6] phenotypes of leukocyte migration than those expressed by BR animals (Fig. 4e, f). At least, ten different embryos, from different replicates, per each group and condition were used for quantification (r = 3, n = 40, N = 120). Our results for NI animals showed similar leukocyte patterns and numbers among all the groups, with tail amputation being the only intervention that provoked a differential increase of XL2+ cells in the tail region (two-way ANOVA P < 0.01; Bonferroni's posttest P < 0.0001 for Tail vs. the [PAGE 7] rest of the groups; Fig. 4b). Then, we analyzed the XL2 expression in UTI-infected animals subjected to the different interventions. Remarkably, the population of XL2-positive cells after infection for all groups was 2-4-fold greater than in the absence of infection, with leukocytes leaving the central blood vessels and spreading along the entire fin. UTI-infected BR animals expressed the lowest XL2-positive population (19 ± 7 vs. 49 ± 10 XL2-positive cells per area in BR vs. Ctrl, respectively), with significant differences with respect to the rest of the interventions (Bonferroni's posttest P < 0.0001 for BR vs. the rest of the groups).

Thus, these results confirmed our observations at early stages of development. While in the absence of a bacterial threat, the brain is not required for specifying leukocyte number, in the presence of a bacterial threat, the brain is required to induce an appropriate response—migrating behavior of the immune cells.

Next, we analyzed the transgenic *xlurp::GFP* animals, which express GFP in myeloid cells (mainly monocyte/macrophage and granulocyte/neutrophils at these stages)5,52 at st. 46-48 of Ctrl, BR, SC, Tail, and Simv embryos. At least, ten different embryos, from different replicates, per each group and condition were used for quantification (r = 3, n = 40, N = 120; Fig. 4i-o, Supplementary Fig. S3, and Supplementary Video S1). One conspicuous feature observed in BR animals was the presence of longitudinal-like patches of high-density of GFP-positive cells along the dorsal and ventral fin, not detected in the somite or central regions of the body. Consequently, we decided to evaluate the number of immune cells for each experimental group on two independent tail regions: center and periphery, corresponding to the somite region and fin region, respectively (Fig. 4i-l). The central region after tail removal (Tail: 97 ± 27 GFP+ cells) exhibited a marked increase in the number of myeloid cells (normalized to area) compared with Ctrl embryos (59 ± 28 GFP+ cells; Dunn's posttest P = 0.0373; Supplementary Fig. S3a, n), mainly focused at the region close to the amputation plane or injury site, indicating that even weeks after injury, myeloid cells are still invading the injured tail area. This effect was, conversely, not detected after brain removal, as more immune cells were not present either in the face region surrounding the injury site or the central area. In the peripheral region, the absence of the brain provoked a drastic increase in the number of myeloid cells at these late stages, forming defined patches that branched off the fin of the tail, at a long distance from the injury site (from 30 ± 21 GFP+ cells in the Ctrl group to 86 ± 15 GFP+ cells in the BR group; two-way ANOVA P < 0.05; Bonferroni's posttest P < 0.0001). This sprouted-network-like patterning of the myeloid population in the fin region of BR animals displayed a similar pattern to the one detected previously for the peripheral neural network in the absence of the brain.36

Thus, we decided to study the co-location of peripheral nerves with respect to this myeloid population (using Tub immunofluorescence on *xlurp::GFP* embryos). Morphological analysis revealed that, in central regions, myeloid cells of BR exhibited different morphology, with respect to other areas or to Ctrl embryos, with [PAGE 7] rows of flattened cells, compatible with a macrophage-like network, following the internal neuropil.36 This distribution pattern, with myeloid cells in close proximity to the internal neuropil, was entirely absent in Ctrl embryos, where the central areas, with the highest number of GFP cells (Fig. 4i, j; Supplementary Fig. S3e-g), were not intensely occupied by nerves. In the peripheral region, a similar distribution pattern for both myeloid cells and peripheral nerves was detected in BR, with scattered groups of immune cells in proximity to the highly disorganized neural networks (see the area circled within the dashed-white line as an illustrative example in Fig. 4m-o; Supplementary Fig. S3k-m for Ctrl). SC animals exhibited a similar number and general distribution of myeloid cells as the Ctrl group, but the peripheral-nerve phenotype, as revealed by Tub immunofluorescence, showed the same ectopic growth and sprouting of the neural network as in the BR animals and significantly different from the Ctrl group (Supplementary Fig. S3o-q). Simv-treated embryos did not show differences for any marker, myeloid and nerve phenotypes, with respect to the Ctrl group.

Taken together, our results confirmed that brain removal during early development leads to the ectopic presence of mature myeloid cells at later stages of embryogenesis invading the fin, in close proximity to the aberrant peripheral neural network. This aberrant distribution of immune cells occurs far from the distal anterior injury site and is not mediated by the spinal cord pathway. Lack of brain thus produces an immunologically different phenotype than other interventions, such as the removal of a different piece of the body (which induces the increased presence of immune cells but only at the local area of injury), or a severe toxic stress (Simv treatment, which caused no differences in myeloid cells relative to controls), indicating the unique influence of the embryonic brain on immune cell behavior.

[PAGE 7] Brain controls the transcriptional consequences of infection

Given the differences found for the innate immune response with or without a brain, we sought to identify the transcriptional mechanisms underlying the effects. To characterize the transcripts that could be differentially regulated under each condition, we conducted RNA-seq and compared the transcriptome of Ctrl and BR embryos, with or without infection (Fig. 5, Supplementary Tables S1-S7, Supplementary Figs. S4 and S5, Supplementary Note 2, and Supplementary Data 1 and 2).

We first asked which transcripts are controlled by infection in an intact normal embryo by comparing the transcriptome of NI vs. UTI Control animals (Ctrl NI vs. Ctrl UTI, black labels in Fig. 5a). A total of 535 DEGs were regulated by infection in intact embryos, and 152 were unique to this group. Conversely, this number was significantly increased up to 719 (and 338 unique) transcripts controlled by infection in brainless embryos (BR NI vs. BR infected; orange labels in Fig. 5a), revealing that the presence of the brain suppresses the transcriptional consequences of infection [PAGE 8] about twofold. In the absence of infection (comparing Ctrl NI vs. BR NI, blue labels in Fig. 5a), we found that 115 genes (and 37 unique) were responsive to brain removal per se. To characterize the transcriptional response specifically due to brain removal, and not to the removal of any organ in general, we compared the [PAGE 8] dataset of DEGs after brain removal from our study with the DEGs obtained after tail removal that were identified in two prior studies, in Xenopus53 and lizard.54 The tail is a large appendage including a massive CNS component (spinal cord) and triggers a robust regenerative response, allowing us to identify and exclude [PAGE 9] from our analysis genes that are not specific to the removal of the brain. After subtracting the common transcripts between brain and tail removal, we found that, from the initial 115 genes, 91 were unique to our dataset for brain removal and 24 were common with tail amputation (for the complete list of genes, see Supplementary Data 1, Brain Removal vs. Tail Removal). These data indicate that about 75% of the transcripts detected in our study after brain removal are unique to this intervention. The last comparison, Ctrl UTI vs. BR UTI (green labels in Fig. 5a), revealed that the response to infection in the absence of the brain affects the transcription of 218 (117 unique) genes.

Next, we extracted the specific genes with both the highest response (up- or downregulation) and unique (exclusively expressed) within each comparison (see Supplementary Data 1 for the complete list of genes; Supplementary Tables S2-S8 and Supplementary Note 2 for a Summary of the top differentially expressed genes), concluding that most of the genes implicated in the bidirectional communication brain-infection belong to the TNFR-I signaling pathway and encoding of ligands and receptors specific to immune/myeloid cells. Next, we grouped the differentially enriched elements according to their "large-scale functions" to reveal the types of processes mainly regulated within each brain-infection condition. The more predominant gene networks were related to blood, bone, ion transport or transmembrane potential (bioelectric signaling),55,56 apoptosis, development and regeneration, neural, immune response, and bacteria (Supplementary Fig. S4a-d). The bioelectric-related genes (ion transport) occupied 3% of the total DEGs in control embryos under infection (Supplementary Fig. S4a), while this percentage was clearly lower in the rest of the groups (around 1%), consistent with the known role of bioelectric signaling in the innate immune response. The removal of the brain (in the absence of infection) did not induce any changes in the transcription of genes related to bone (0%), with the neural-related functions the most affected (10% of the total transcriptome for Ctrl NI vs. BR NI; Supplementary Fig. S4c). How the absence of a brain affects the response to infection (Ctrl UTI vs. BR UTI; Supplementary Fig. S4d) was reflected by considerable changes (with respect to Ctrl NI vs. Ctrl UTI) in the percentages of immune-related transcripts (-8%), neural-related (+6%), bone (-4%), and developmental and regeneration-related (+2%) functions.

To reveal the gene regulatory networks (GRN) and motifs and features that were statistically overrepresented, we performed SNEA (Fig. 5c-f, Supplementary Figs. S4 and S5, and Supplementary Data 1 and 2 for the complete list of pathways). In animals developed with a brain, 80 pathways were controlled by the infection (66 of them were unique to Ctrl NI vs. Ctrl UTI; black labels in Fig. 5b). Conversely, in animals developed without a brain (RNA isolation took place after brain removal), infection induced the differential regulation of 151 pathways (116 were unique to BR NI vs. BR UTI; orange labels in Fig. 5b), suggesting that about 70% of the response to infection depends on the presence of the brain.

In grouping the neural-related pathways, we determined that three elements were shared by Ctrl UTI and BR UTI (innervation, neurogenesis, and brain microcirculation), five sub-networks were included exclusively in infected embryos with a brain (Ctrl UTI: adrenergic transmission, CNS function, glia proliferation, brain blood flow, and cerebrovascular circulation; Fig. 5c), and eleven were unique to infected embryos without a brain (BR UTI: dopaminergic system, glial cell reaction, glial cell response, hindbrain development, hippocampus plasticity, nerve discharge, neural tube closure, neural tube patterning, neuron development, neuron differentiation, and peripheral-nerve function; Fig. 5d). Intriguingly, in the latter category, networks related to bacteria were upregulated by 20%, overall as a group (Supplementary Fig. S4e). The only common pathways regulated in both response to brain removal and tail removal were microtubule- and cell division-related (cell cycle regulation, cell fate, chromatin remodeling, chromosome movement, epithelium development, microtubule bundling, microtubule cytoskeleton organization, microtubule sliding, and microtubule/kinetochore interaction). Some of the unique pathways differentially regulated after brain removal only include apoptosis of neutrophils, apoptotic chromosome condensation, DNA annealing, DNA damage excision, DNA damage recognition, DNA end joining repair, DNA strand breakage, neurogenesis, neuron development, and neuron differentiation. The sub-network related to the innate immune response was one of the most affected by the presence/absence of the brain. Specifically, the innate immunity for brainless embryos with infection exhibited an upregulation of up to 11% (median change in the network of 1.11-fold; Fig. 5e). Some of these unique immune-pathways regulated in the absence of the brain were complement activation (classical pathway, Fig. 5f), immune complex clearance and activation, macrophage-focused (adhesion, apoptosis, fusion), and neutrophil-focused (activation, chemotaxis, extravasation, and recruitment; all genes within a differentially expressed pathway are provided in Supplementary Data 2).

Thus, our analysis revealed profound changes in the transcriptional networks responsive to infection induced by the absence of the brain, suggesting a key role of the early brain in producing a robust innate immune response to systemic infection and implicating a variety of factors related to immune and neural pathways such as migration or dopaminergic transmission.


[PAGE 11] Dopamine is implied in the protective effects of the brain

Considering the molecular candidates and pathways revealed by RNA-seq, we next targeted one of the regulatory networks exclusively affected after infection in the absence of the brain. From the 11 neural pathways unique to BR UTI, we decided to validate the possible role of the dopaminergic signaling in mediating the increased susceptibility to infection, as it has been also implicated in macrophage migration.57

First, we functionally tested whether the DA levels were quantitatively different between Ctrl and BR infected embryos. Embryos were analyzed by LC-MS/MS at early st. 35 (~20 h post-surgery, 44 h post-infection), immediately before the peak of infection-induced death in BR animals and the significant differences both in survival rate and apoptosis are reached with respect to Ctrl embryos (Fig. 2a, b). DA turnover rates were significantly different between Ctrl (35.56 ± 10.49 pg/µL) and BR (14.90 ± 0.99 pg/µL) embryos (r = 3, n = 30; unpaired t-test P =