It's never too early to get it Right
A conserved role for the cytoskeleton in left-right asymmetry
Laura N Vandenberg, Joan M Lemire & Michael Levin

[PAGE 2] Introduction
With a few notable exceptions, vertebrates (and many invertebrates) have bilaterally symmetric external bodyplans. Yet these same animals exhibit consistent asymmetries in the position or anatomy of internal organs such as the heart, viscera, and brain. Asymmetry of the left-right (LR) axis is a fascinating area of research, and the existence of this asymmetry raises many fundamental questions for biologists: What are the implications of asymmetry for the function and physiology of the internal organs? Why are all normal individuals not only asymmetric, but all asymmetric in the same direction (rather than a 50:50 mix)? At what developmental stage is asymmetry initiated? How conserved are the mechanisms that produce asymmetry across species? And how is consistent asymmetry generated in a world where no macroscopic feature of chemistry or physics distinguishes left from right?
Asymmetry extends beyond the internal bodyplan and is therefore relevant to other fields of science.¹ A number of syndromes and drug effects exhibit sidedness of presentation in human patients.2-6 In the field of oncology, LR biases have recently been uncovered for health endpoints including the site and the prognosis and likelihood of metastasis8-10 for several types of cancer. In the fields of behavioral science and neurology, strong LR biases have been noted in behavioral features such as hand dominance,¹¹ and altered neurological asymmetries have been linked to diseases and disabilities such as dyslexia and schizophrenia.12-14 There also appear to be biological associations between handedness and other disease outcomes including susceptibility to intestinal parasites,15 asthma, and autoimmune diseases, 16,17 suggesting brain-body links that should continue to be explored in the context of laterality.
Finally, LR asymmetry is an important topic for embryologists, neonatologists, and pediatricians. Although defects in LR asymmetry are not terribly common compared with other birth defects (affecting 1:6000 live births), there are severe medical consequences for individuals with some of these conditions including heterotaxia (the lack of concordance between internal organs, allowing each organ to individually "decide" on its placement on the left or right side of the body), single organ inversions such as dextrocardia (the reversal in position and morphology of the heart), and isomerisms (symmetry of the LR axis, leading to either duplication or complete loss of single organs such as the spleen). Patients with complete reversal of asymmetry (situs inversus) have fewer health consequences than these other conditions because conditions such as heterotaxia and isomerisms often involve inappropriate connections between the heart, lungs, and other visceral organs. 18-21
It is widely acknowledged that the generation of asymmetry in embryos requires 3 separate steps22: 1) the breaking of symmetry, allowing the LR axis to be consistently oriented relative to the dorsal-ventral and anterior-posterior axes, 2) the translation of these initial asymmetries to produce asymmetric gene expression on the left and right sides of the body, and 3) the translation of asymmetric gene expression into asymmetric position and morphology of the internal organs (Fig. 1). In contrast to these last 2 steps, which have been well characterized in a number of model species, 23-27 there remains significant debate over the mechanisms that operate in the first step, i.e., the origin of symmetry breaking.28-31

[PAGE 3] Models for LR Asymmetry
One model for symmetry breaking proposes that ciliary motion within a small pocket of tissue in the neurulating embryo produces LR asymmetries. In this ciliary model of LR asymmetry, the movement of cilia produces a directional fluid flow within this fluid-filled space, termed the node (mouse), the gastrocoel roof plate (GRP, Xenopus), or Kupffer's Vesicle (KV, zebrafish). Because of their consistent structural chirality and tilt, cilia can produce a right-to-left current that asymmetrically distributes particles and can trigger mechanosensory cilia on one side of the embryo. 29,32-37 The ciliary model is appealing because it derives laterality from a biochemical structure, and there is a strong correlation between ciliopathies and LR patterning defects in human patients. 29,37,38 However, a number of inconsistencies have arisen between this model and experimental data, including the identification of numerous species (such as pig39 and chick40,41) that orient their LR axis without cilia or prior to the appearance of motile cilia,28,39,42 the existence of genetic mutants with defects in ciliary function but normal LR asymmetry,41,43-46 and the appearance of consistent asymmetries long before ciliary flow, 47-60 among others. 23,61-64
The existence of consistently asymmetric animals without cilia at the node commits the cilia model to requiring a highly divergent origin of asymmetry among species23,61 —an evolutionarily unlikely scenario. For all of the above reasons, alternative models have been proposed that focus on highly conserved intracellular/cytoplasmic pathways. The general class of intracellular models postulates that asymmetry originates during very early developmental stages due to the chiral nature of the cytoskeleton.63,65,66 In contrast to the ciliary model's focus on relatively late extracellular fluid flows, the intracellular model postulates that asymmetry is generated from within early embryonic cells where an oriented chiral cytoskeleton is amplified to tissue-level asymmetries. One hypothesis is that a chiral cytoskeleton directs the distribution of chromatids during the first cleavage stage, 67,68 and that these chromatids are differentially imprinted, allowing for the distinction of the left and right sides. 66,68,69 Another hypothesis postulates that the chiral cytoskeleton actively directs the asymmetric distribution of proteins including K+ channels and H⁺ pumps by intracellular motors, 54,70 which produce consistent biases in the pH and transmembrane voltage on the left and right sides of the embryo.50,71 These biases establish bioelectrical gradients that drive the asymmetric distribution of small charged molecules such as serotonin through gap junctions from left to right in the early embryo49,72,73 (Fig. 2). Serotonin, which accumulates on the right side of the embryo, can epigenetically repress the expression of asymmetric genes such as Xnr-1, the Xenopus homolog of the highly conserved left-side marker Nodal.74
Experimental evidence supports both of these intracellular models, and they are mutually compatible. Furthermore, we have recently proposed 2 novel possibilities. 62 One is a unified model of asymmetry, whereby LR asymmetry is initiated during the early cleavage stages of development via inherent chirality of the cytoskeleton, and asymmetric information is amplified during subsequent developmental stages via the asymmetric intracellular distribution of serotonin and the asymmetric motion of cilia to distribute extracellular morphogens and ions. According to this unified model, LR asymmetry is best established when all mechanisms are working properly, but the LR axis can still be oriented in species lacking one or more parts of these pathways (for example, in species that lack cilia).
The other recently proposed model is the stochastic model of asymmetry, which proposes that embryos of one species can stochastically choose among one of several pathways to pattern their LR axis: within any clutch of embryos, some use one pathway to initiate asymmetry, and others “choose” another pathway. This maximizes the chance that at least some individuals in a population will be unaffected by environmental factors that affect one of the LR pathways, and explains why most perturbations of a LR pathway component affect some but not all embryos in any experimental population.
Importantly, all of these models, including the ciliary model, point to aspects of the cytoskeleton as a central feature of asymmetry. This addendum will focus on recent studies examining the role of the cytoskeleton in the establishment of LR asymmetry, emphasizing conservation of mechanisms across species and even kingdoms. There is now strong evidence that asymmetry is an ancient, highly conserved feature of single cells and higher organisms.


[PAGE 5] The cytoskeleton: A central actor in models of LR asymmetry
The centrosome is comprised of 2 centrioles and a matrix of proteins including γ-tubulin that forms the microtubule organizing center (MTOC).75 The centrosome has functional and structural asymmetries that are considered essential to maintain cell polarity and asymmetry, 76-78 and indeed for linking the microtubule cytoskeleton to large-scale axes of the organism.76,79 For example, the pair of centrioles that comprise the centrosome are asymmetric in size and only the maternal centriole can become a basal body and nucleate the formation of cilia.80 Centriole asymmetry is also important for the biased segregation of mRNAs and transcription factors. 81,82 The mother centriole is responsible for cell geometry and relative positioning of other organelles within the cell. 83-85 The basal body itself has inherent asymmetries: when some protists undergo the G₁ to S transition and extend a new cilium, the newly formed basal body completes a highly conserved leftward rotation around the old cilium.86
All of the models of LR asymmetry described above are intimately linked by their reliance on the cytoskeleton to initiate LR asymmetry (Fig. 3). In the 2 variants of the intracellular model of LR asymmetry, the implicated cytoskeleton is solely localized within the cell, without any external features (i.e., projections such as cilia). In the model implicating ion flux, the chirality of the microtubule and actin filaments controls the directionality of cytoplasmic tracks for motor proteins such as kinesin and dynein, thus regulating asymmetric movement of intracellular cargo. Specifically, it postulates that the MTOC sets up a cytoskeleton that is oriented with respect to the other 2 axes of the prospective embryo, and is subtly biased to the right, to allow some maternal proteins to be preferentially enriched on the right side during early cleavage stages.87 For the mechanism involving asymmetric chromatid segregation, the cytoskeletal component is also intracellular, involving the machinery that controls chromatid movements during cell divisions.67,68 In the ciliary model of LR asymmetry, the cytoskeleton is implicated both within the cilia itself and in the basal body, the anchor for the cilia in the cell.88
Other aspects of the cytoskeleton generate various kinds of polarity. For example,

[PAGE 5]
the chance that at least some individuals in
a population will be unaffected by envi-
ronmental factors that affect one of the LR
pathways, and explains why most perturba-
tions of a LR pathway component affect
some but not all embryos in any experi-
mental population.
Importantly, all of these models, includ-
ing the ciliary model, point to aspects of the
cytoskeleton as a central feature of asym-
metry. This addendum will focus on recent
studies examining the role of the cytoskele-
ton in the establishment of LR asymmetry,
emphasizing conservation of mechanisms
across species and even kingdoms. There is
now strong evidence that asymmetry is an
ancient, highly conserved feature of single
cells and higher organisms.

The cytoskeleton: A central actor in
models of LR asymmetry
The centrosome is comprised of 2 cen-
trioles and a matrix of proteins including
y-tubulin that forms the microtubule orga-
nizing center (MTOC).75 The centrosome
has functional and structural asymmetries
that are considered essential to maintain
cell polarity and asymmetry, 76-78 and indeed
for linking the microtubule cytoskeleton to
large-scale axes of the organism.76,79 For
example, the pair of centrioles that com-
prise the centrosome are asymmetric in size
and only the maternal centriole can become
a basal body and nucleate the formation of
cilia.80 Centriole asymmetry is also impor-
tant for the biased segregation of mRNAs
and transcription factors. 81,82 The mother
centriole is responsible for cell geometry
and relative positioning of other organelles
within the cell. 83-85 The basal body itself has
inherent asymmetries: when some protists
undergo the G₁ to S transition and extend
a new cilium, the newly formed basal body
completes a highly conserved leftward rota-
tion around the old cilium.86

All of the models of LR asymmetry
described above are intimately linked by
their reliance on the cytoskeleton to initiate
LR asymmetry (Fig. 3). In the 2 variants of
the intracellular model of LR asymmetry, the
implicated cytoskeleton is solely localized
within the cell, without any external fea-
tures (i.e., projections such as cilia). In the
model implicating ion flux, the chirality
of the microtubule and actin filaments
controls the directionality of cytoplasmic
tracks for motor proteins such as kinesin
and dynein, thus regulating asymmetric
movement of intracellular cargo. Specifi-
cally, it postulates that the MTOC sets up
a cytoskeleton that is oriented with respect
to the other 2 axes of the prospective
embryo, and is subtly biased to the right,
to allow some maternal proteins to be pref-
erentially enriched on the right side during
early cleavage stages.87 For the mechanism
involving asymmetric chromatid segrega-
tion, the cytoskeletal component is also
intracellular, involving the machinery that
controls chromatid movements during cell
divisions.67,68 In the ciliary model of LR
asymmetry, the cytoskeleton is implicated
both within the cilia itself and in the basal
body, the anchor for the cilia in the cell.88
Other aspects of the cytoskeleton gener-
ate various kinds of polarity. For example,

[PAGE 6]
in cultured monolayers undergoing a
scratch-wound assay, individual cells at the
"wound" edge repolarize so that the centro-
some, golgi apparatus, and lamellipodia are
on the side of the cell facing the wound,
whereas the nucleus, stress fibers, and
mature focal adhesions form on the side
furthest from the wound edge.89 This re-
organization is dependent on CDC42,90,91
a protein involved in apical-basal polarity
that has been implicated in LR patterning
in Xenopus and the asymmetric cell pro-
trusions needed to establish the LR axis in
C. elegans.93 Together, these data suggest
that there are highly conserved aspects
of asymmetry that operate in single cells,
invertebrates, and vertebrates, and the cyto-
skeleton has a central role in the major mod-
els of LR asymmetry. As will be discussed
below, it appears that a number of the path-
ways involved in cell polarity decisions are
intimately linked with LR asymmetry. 93,94

From plants to frogs: A clear role for
the cytoskeleton
The majority of plants display radial
or bilateral symmetry in their flowers and
leaves, yet some species demonstrate asym-
metries that manifest in specific organs.95
For example, asymmetry is often observed
in the handedness of coiling as stems grow
around other objects and can be seen in
the twisting of axial organs." The leaves,
flowers, roots, and stems of Arabidopsis
are normally organized in radially sym-
metrical patterns. However, fascinating
molecular genetic studies have revealed
a role for tubulins in maintaining this
apparent symmetry (similar to the way in
which retinoic acid signaling symmetrizes
inherently-asymmetric somite pattern-
ing"). a-tubulin is a protein that dimer-
izes with ẞ-tubulin to make microtubules.
Mutations in a-tubulin at the intradimer
interface produce Arabidopsis plants with
left-handed chiral roots and stems and
clockwise-bending leaves and flowers. 98
Similarly, mutations in a core subunit
of y-tubulin-containing complexes also
produce plants with these morphological
asymmetries.99 Collectively, these studies
indicate that alterations in the architecture
of microtubules regulate large-scale sym-
metry properties of this plant.
In contrast to the cilia model, which
must postulate divergent origins of asym-
metry in animals such as mouse, pig,
chick, frog, and invertebrates, the intracel-
lular model is compatible with an ancient,
highly conserved role for the symmetry-
breaking mechanism. To directly test this
key distinction between the 2 paradigms, a
recent study100 assessed the widest-possible
conservation of asymmetry mechanisms.
First, mRNA encoding tubulins bearing
mutations homologous to those that induce
asymmetry in Arabidopsis were intro-
duced into Xenopus embryos. Expression
of mRNA encoding mutant a-tubulin or
a mutated form of the y-tubulin associated
protein tubgcp2 induced heterotaxia, even
when targeted to cells that do not contrib-
ute to the ciliated organ (GRP), but only
when these mRNAs were injected at the
1-cell stage. When injections occurred at
the 2-cell stage or later, normal LR pat-
terning occurred, even when mRNAs were
targeted to the ciliated cells of the GRP.
Injections with mutant tubgcp2 mRNA
also disrupted asymmetry and direction-
ality of microtubule-dependent motor
protein transport—important aspects of
the intracellular model of LR asymmetry.
Finally, expression of either mutant tub-
gcp2 or mutant a-tubulin altered LR biases
in the expression of cofilin-la, a polarity
protein that mediates actin-tubulin interac-
tions101,102 that was found to be enriched on
the right half of the wild-type 4-cell Xeno-
pus embryo. Indeed, an unbiased proteomic
analysis of the 4-cell frog embryo revealed
a number of maternal products that were
differentially localized between the left and
right sides; expression of mutant cytoskel-
etal components abolished or reversed LR
biases in a number of such proteins, includ-
ing ion transporters, other cytoskeletal
components, and proteins involved in other
cellular processes. Taken together, the data
clearly indicate that in the frog embryo,
consistent LR asymmetry already exists by
the second cell division, and involves some
aspect of tubulin-mediated intracellular
activity (such as transport of cargo).
Continuing the strategy of testing the
same mechanism in highly diverse phyla
with very different bodyplans, the same
tubulin mutations were tested in the nema-
tode model. In C. elegans, there are 2 AWC
olfactory neurons that are morphologi-
cally symmetrical but display LR biases in
expression of chemosensory receptors103;
the mechanisms responsible for producing

[PAGE 7]
these asymmetries involve gap junctions
and ion flows-2 components of LR pat-
terning in several vertebrate species. 104,105
Previous studies have demonstrated that
these neural asymmetries can be disrupted
by treating C. elegans embryos with phar-
maceuticals that disrupt microtubule
polymerization.104 Expression of mutant
a-tubulin prevented chemosensory recep-
tor asymmetry (based on the expression
of a reporter gene str-2p) in 58% of the
embryos, a very significant change from
wild type C. elegans where asymmetric
expression of str-2p was observed in all
worms.106

Importantly, consistent asymmetry does
not require a multicellular structure (such
as a node or embryonic blastoderm) at all:
a number of single cells exhibit consistent
chirality in their movements and behav-
iors. 94,107-113 To test the same cytoskeletal
component in human cells and probe the
relevance of this component to cellular
asymmetry in the absence of any coor-
dinated fluid flows, the effects of mutant
a-tubulin were investigated in the human
neutrophil-like cell line HL-60.106 In wild-
type cultured HL-60 cells, one “dorso-ven-
tral" axis is defined by the interaction of the
cells with the culture plate (vs. interaction
of the cell's top surface with the culture
media); a second axis (“anterior-posterior,”
perpendicular to the first) can be identified
by drawing a line from the nucleus to the
centrosome, thus a pseudo-LR axis can be
defined based on these other 2 axes. Wild-
type HL-60 cells typically extend a pseu-
dopod to the left of the nucleus-centrosome
axis following exposure to fMLP, a che-
moattractant.94 This leftward bias can be
abolished by pharmaceuticals that disrupt
microtubule polymerization. Transfected
HL-60 cells expressing mutant a-tubulin
no longer displayed leftward biases in
response to fMLP-the mutant proteins
abolished this form of LR asymmetry in
cultured human cells106 as they did in vivo.

The role for tubulins in LR pattern-
ing in Arabidopsis, Xenopus, C. elegans,
and cultured human neutrophils reveals a
remarkable degree of conservation of this
molecular mechanism. Collectively, these
studies implicate the microtubule cytoskel-
eton in a number of types of asymmetries
operating across multiple levels of bio-
logical organization, and suggest different

[PAGE 8]
amplification mechanisms within the very
different bodyplans.

How early are the earliest steps of
asymmetry?
Mutant tubulin mRNAs disrupted LR
patterning in Xenopus tadpoles, but only if
present right after fertilization106 – injection
at the 2-cell stage was already too late to
affect asymmetry. Because mRNAs begin
to be translated within a short time of their
introduction to the Xenopus embryo (i.e.,
Lobikin et al. demonstrate strong expres-
sion at the 2-cell stage when injected prior
to the first cleavage106), the results constrain
the role of tubulin to events that occur
within the first hour or two of fertiliza-
tion, at the 1 or 2-cell stage. This tim-
ing is consistent with both the model of
asymmetrically segregating maternal ion
translocator proteins23,114 and the chroma-
tid segregation model.66,67

Similar results have been obtained
for a limited number of other reagents,
mostly limited to manipulations that tar-
get the cytoskeleton (although ion flows
exhibit similar timing requirements¹15). In
one example, treatment of embryos with
2,3-butanedione monoxime (BDM), a
myosin inhibitor, randomizes the LR axis,
but only when administered prior to the
first cell cleavage.47 In fact, studies focused
on identifying the critical period for this
compound reveal a very short period dur-
ing the 1-cell stage where embryos are most
sensitive, whereas BDM treatments even
during the late 1-cell stage have no effect
on LR patterning. In another example, low
frequency vibrations were shown to disrupt
LR patterning in Xenopus and zebrafish
embryos116,117; mechanistic studies in Xeno-
pus revealed that these vibrations affect
the early cytoskeleton and the integrity of
tight junctions in the early cleavage stage
embryo.116

Interestingly, the molecular motors
that control cytoskeletal movement have
been modeled as ratchets.118 The stepwise
motion of the motor along the polymer is
powered by the thermal energy (Brown-
ian motion) of the fibril. The motor uses
ATP hydrolysis to resist the movement in
a particular direction; myosin V is a left-
handed spiral motor moving toward the
plus end of actin,119 while myosin II is
right-handed spiral motor. 120 It may thus be
speculated that molecular vibrations affect
the structure of the cytoskeleton as a com-
ponent of symmetry breaking,121 and could
impact the delivery of molecular cargo by
increasing the thermal energy of the cyto-
skeletal components. Consistent with an
early role for endogenous molecular motion
in the earliest steps of laterality establish-
ment, sinusoidal vibrations applied to frog
embryos that started at the 1-cell stage were
able to disrupt LR patterning; they were
significantly more effective than vibrations
that commenced at the 2-cell stage (31%
vs. 19%) and more than twice as effective
as vibrations that began after 6 rounds of
cell division (12%).116

A final example used classical devel-
opmental biology techniques to probe the
timing of initiation of LR asymmetry.122
Xenopus embryos were UV-irradiated at
the 1-cell stage to prevent cortical rota-
tion,123 thus effectively removing all axial
patterning information. When patterning
information was restored at the 1-cell stage
via mechanical tipping, a method that uses
gravity to physically induce cortical rota-
tion,124 normal LR patterning resulted.122
However, if axial patterning was induced
slightly later (either via injection of lithium
chloride at the 32-cell stage, which begins
inducing dorsal determinants immediately,
or via injection of XSiamois, a molecular
component of Spemann's organizer, which
induces zygotic transcription at midblas-
tula transition),125,126 LR patterning defects
were observed.122 This experiment con-
firmed that initiation of LR asymmetry
occurs prior to the 32-cell stage.50,55,70,71

These timing experiments need to be
considered in the context of the numer-
ous additional experiments that have
revealed consistent biases in mRNA
localization, protein expression, and
physiological endpoints during early
cleavage stages.70-74 Furthermore,
many of these early cleavage stage asym-
metries have been shown to be disrupted
by treatment with reagents that target
microtubules and/or actin filaments.54
Collectively, these results suggest that the
earliest steps in the LR asymmetry path-
way are occurring very early-within
the first cleavage stages, and likely prior
to the first cell cleavage. It should be
noted that while none of these have been
tested in mammalian embryos yet, even
mouse embryo cells are known to not be
LR-equivalent by the 8-cell stage, 127 consis-
tent with early models.

Starting with the cytoskeleton: a
model for how the LR axis stays on track
In many species, the sperm contributes
a centrosome to the resulting embryo at
the time of fertilization as well as other
essential components of the MTOC that
attract proteins to this complex from the
egg's stores. 128,129 Experiments involving the
fertilization of an egg with multiple sperm
(i.e., polyspermy) have revealed the conse-
quences of having multiple centrosomes in
an early embryo; these embryos typically
develop multiple cleavage furrows, distrib-
ute their chromosomes unevenly between
blastomeres, and fail to develop beyond
the early cleavage stages. 76,130 Additional
studies have shown that the centrosome
itself is sufficient to induce cleavage of an
unfertilized egg, indicating that this struc-
ture plays a central role in the presence and
localization of the first cleavage plane. 131
Centrosome location has been linked to
symmetry breaking in a number of organ-
isms, perhaps most clearly understood in C.
elegans 132 and neuronal polarity.133 More-
over, it is now known that asymmetry of
the centriole plays a critical determining
role in shaping the internal organization of
cells through the attachment of microtu-
bule rootlets to specific sets of microtubule
triplets on the centriole.134,135 Finally, data
on the role of the MTOC in guiding cell
migration at wound edges reveal the central
role of the cytoskeletal organizing center in
orienting cellular axes with respect to large-
scale external signals. 89-91,136

We propose that asymmetry is an
ancient aspect of life and that the mecha-
nism for its orientation is very deeply
conserved. Our model postulates that the
cytoskeleton is the origin of asymmetry in
all of these species, and that the orientation
of the MTOC with the 2 major embryonic
axes at fertilization is sufficient to generate
asymmetry in individual cells as well as the
early embryo. The MTOC thus plays the
role of the F-molecule that was theorized
by Brown and Wolpert137: a structure that
allows the LR axis to be oriented consis-
tently with respect to the dorsal-ventral and
anterior-posterior axes. Because the centro-
some is asymmetric (Fig. 3), the MTOC
itself has inherent asymmetries that can
be amplified to cell-level asymmetries.79,138


[PAGE 9]
It also is known to serve as an intracel-
lular anchor, allowing for the assembly
of chiral cytoskeletal tracks that can be
used for directed and biased intracellular
transport, 61,65,139,140 and has been linked
to laterality disturbances in nematodes, 141
zebrafish,142 and humans.143 We postulate
that the orientation of this chiral cytoskel-
eton relative to the other axes can be estab-
lished based on the sperm entry point. 139,144
The unfertilized egg has radial symmetry,
but like other single cells, 94,109,145 it has a
chiral actin cytoskeleton47; only after fer-
tilization is the radial symmetry broken,
because the point of sperm entry offers
a distinct point on the circumference at
which the counterclockwise direction of
the actin uniquely orients a linear LR axis
(Fig. 4). Such an intracellular LR axis is
then used to redistribute maternal compo-
nents to the right side, as has been shown
to occur by the 4-cell stage.70,100 The ear-
liest events establishing concordant link-
age between the 3 major axes thus involve
not only tubulin, as shown by Lobikin et
al. and previous work implicating micro-
tubules in asymmetry of a range of model
species, but also actin; indeed, a number
of actin-regulating proteins such as inver-
sin and myosin are functionally implicated
in laterality.113,146-149 Consistent with this,
the Lobikin 2012 study showed asymmet-
ric localization of cofilin, a protein that
mediates interaction between actin and
tubulin and regulates cell polarization.101,102
With the MTOC and the cytoskeleton
establishing LR asymmetry shortly after
fertilization, a number of additional steps
are required to amplify and enhance these
very early asymmetries. These include the
asymmetric localization of ion channels
and transporters, and the subsequent asym-
metric distribution of intracellular signaling
molecules including serotonin. 48-50,70-74,150-154
Later-functioning mechanisms such as
asymmetric cell migration,39 asymmetric
deposition of extracellular matrix compo-
nents,51,52,57,155 and asymmetric fluid flow³7
may also serve as mechanisms to amplify
the earliest asymmetries. Finally, a large
body of knowledge about planar cell polar-
ity indicates that small asymmetries can be
amplified over whole tissues via a conserved
set of intracellular proteins, 87 and global
PCP orientation is now known to be set by
microtubules156; recent evidence suggests
that planar cell polarity proteins can alter
the biased position of cilia at the node,157
but can also affect LR patterning via cilia-
independent mechanisms. 92,158

Indeed, the picture painted of such
early LR asymmetry mechanisms looks
strikingly isomorphic to the current under-
standing of other examples of axial pattern-
ing throughout the animal kingdom. For
example: "Single-cell patterning begins
with an asymmetric cue that orients the axis
of polarity. Despite great diversity in the
types of cues, common mechanisms appear
to mediate the polarizing response. Rho-
family GTPases initially process and rein-
force polarity cues by remodeling cortical
actin, and these local asymmetries are sub-
sequently propagated to the microtubules,
membrane and secretory pathway to gen-
erate the final pattern"159. Consistent with
this, recent data implicated Rab GTPases
in early asymmetry in Xenopus.160 Inter-
estingly, elegant molecular biomechanics
work now shows that single cell chiral-
ity can drive the asymmetry of individual
organs, such as the fruit fly hindgut, 161 as
well as that of the whole bodyplan.
The study discussed in detail above
implicates a-tubulin in a number of highly
diverse organisms, and previous studies
have implicated aspects of the intracellular
cytoskeleton in LR patterning of ciliates, 162
Arabidopsis, C. elegans, 163 Drosophila,149
snails, 164 and Xenopus.47,54 Experimental
evidence indicates that a number of down-
stream mechanisms may also be conserved
between some plants, invertebrates, and
vertebrates (Table 1), but additional experi-
ments using a variety of model species are
needed to dissect these factors in a greater
number of species. Below, we outline some
strategies for the study of LR patterning in
a uniquely tractable model system – the

[PAGE 9] Table 1. Cytoskeletal proteins have a conserved role in LR patterning

Table 1. Cytoskeletal proteins have a conserved role in LR patterning
Model system
Cytoskeleton /
motor proteins
lon flux
Gap
junctions
5HT
Ciliary flow
Single cells (protozoa,
mammalian cells)
94, 110, 113
Arabidopsis
C. elegans
Snails
Drosophila
Sea urchin
Ciona
Zebrafish
96, 185
163
185, 196
X
X
103
X
X
149
X
152, 197
X
198
199
50, 115
200, 201
Xenopus
100, 202
48
203
49, 192, 193
204
Chick
48
205
49
40, 41
Rabbit
206
Mouse
Pig
39
207
39
Green cells indicate data implicating the mechanism in asymmetry of that species. Red cells indicate
data showing the mechanism is not implicated. 5HT = serotonin. Blank cells indicate lack of data (mecha-
nisms not yet tested in those species). Numbers indicate specific reference containing the functional
data. X indicates unlikely involvement due to anatomy (e.g., no cilia present at time of asymmetry).

Xenopus laevis embryo, which facilitates
experiments both on the earliest steps of
asymmetry and on later components such
as planar polarity and ciliary flows.

Recommendations for design of stud-
ies of LR asymmetry

As discussed elsewhere,62 a few key strat-
egies must be kept in mind when probing
functions of new pathways in asymmetry,
as many studies do not assess whether LR-
relevant targets may have early roles (i.e.,
prior to stages where cilia are present).
Moreover, most experimental designs used
to provide data on putative LR functions
of proteins at the nodal cilia in fact cannot
rule out other intracellular roles.

Strategy 1: Comparison of mRNA
injections during the early 1-cell stage
with injections at the 2-cell, 4-cell, or later
stages. A number of studies have shown
that molecular constructs are effective
at disrupting the LR axis only when they
are introduced during the earliest stages
of development, but are less effective – or
ineffective – at later stages, even when
targeted to cells that contribute to flow at
the node.55,106,140,150 Similarly, experiments
can compare the effects of injections of
mRNA (translated within a short period
of injection) with the effects of injections
of DNA (which will not be translated until
after midblastula transition – several hours
after fertilization, when thousands of cells
are present).71 In addition to these early vs.
late injections, additional tools are avail-
able for use in other developmental models
including the use of inducible promoters in
mice (which could be used to drive expres-
sion of key proteins at cleavage stages vs at
primitive streak stages), and drug expo-
sures beginning at various time-points in
Xenopus and zebrafish. Collectively, these
tools can distinguish between proteins with
early and late roles.

Strategy 2: Targeting mRNAs to spe-
cific regions of the embryo. A good fate
map has been produced for Xenopus,165,166
and subsequent experiments have revealed
that only dorsal blastomeres, and more
specifically the regions corresponding to
the dorsal marginal zone, contribute to the
GRP.167,168 Further analyses indicate that
only the cilia on the left side of the midline
are required for flow at the GRP169; thus,
only injections targeted to the left dorsal
blastomere should influence LR patterning
via alterations in ciliary flow. Conversely,
injections in the right ventral blastomere
should not influence ciliary flow, and thus
any effects observed from injections at this
site support cilia-independent effects. In
zebrafish, injections can be targeted to the
KV or to the entire embryo170; while no
available technique targets expression to
all regions of the embryo with the excep-
tion of the KV, a comparison of the effects
of ubiquitous expression to the effects of
KV-restricted expression can be made. In
mice, recent studies171 showed that node-
only rescues of deleted genes do not fully
restore normal asymmetry, but no studies
yet examine what happens when some of
the gene products are present only at early
stages, or everywhere but the node.

Strategy 3: Early injections that localize
mRNAs to small regions of the embryo.
For mRNA constructs that are effective
only when introduced at the 1-cell stage,
or in species that do not have an obvious
fate-map, and thus cannot be directly tar-
geted in the left-dorsal or right-ventral
blastomeres, it is helpful to inject these
constructs in biased locations of the 1-cell
embryo (i.e., some injections at the animal-
most point, others at equatorial points) and
include tagged lineage labels. This allows
for a posteriori sorting, such that the local-
ization of the construct to specific struc-
tures in the embryo can be related to the
incidence of LR patterning defects.

For all of these experiments, we recom-
mend using mRNAs that encode wild-
type, mutant, constitutively active, and/
or dominant negative forms of the protein
of interest. Morpholinos should be avoided
because they cannot affect maternal pro-
teins – studies using morpholinos (and
RNAi) are completely blind to any LR
mechanisms depending on maternal pro-
teins working prior to zygotic transcrip-
tion, which are plentiful in species such as
Xenopus.48,70,160,172,173 Comparing injections
of mRNA vs. linearized DNA constructs
allows for a comparison of early vs. late
mechanisms for the same molecular target.

An important toolkit is also provided by
pharmacological blockers and activators; it
is easy to compare the effects of exposure
beginning early in development with those
of exposure that only starts after particular
time-points174,175 (this strategy does not rely
on wash-out of drug).

A number of previous publications
have used these experimental approaches
[PAGE 10] to identify proteins involved
in early, cilia-independent
mechanisms of establishing
LR asymmetry (reviewed in
61). As a proof-of-principle,
we have examined additional
constructs using these exper-
imental guidelines and have
identified specific early roles
for cytoskeletal proteins as
well as roles for other pro-
teins that are distinct from
ciliary flow at the GRP (see
Supplemental Materials for
detailed information about
materials and methods). The
first construct we examined
was a mutant form of tubulin
binding cofactor B (TBCB),
which regulates cell polarity
and microtubule dynamics
in Drosophila176; using the
protocol outlined in Strat-
egy 1 above, we found that
expression of TBCB mutant
mRNA at the 1-cell stage
induced heterotaxia in 15%
of frog embryos (Fig. 5A). In
contrast, injections at 2-cell
or 4-cell had no effect on
LR patterning, even when
TBCB mutant mRNA was
targeted to the GRP (via
injections in the dorsal left
blastomere).

We also examined a con-
struct encoding a dominant
negative of the Rho GTPase
and cell polarity protein
CDC42,177 which we had
previously observed induced
LR patterning defects when
injected at the 1-cell stage.92
Using the protocol outlined
in Strategy 2 above, we deter-
mined that expression of
dominant negative CDC42
induced heterotaxia whether
it was injected in blastomeres
that contribute to ciliary flow at the GRP
(dorsal left), or to blastomeres that have no
such contribution (ventral right) (Fig. 5B).
These results suggest that CDC42 has a role
in LR patterning, but that altered CDC42
expression anywhere in the embryo can
induce heterotaxia and does not rely on
interaction with cilia. These results are
similar to the third example, expression of
a mutant serotonin receptor (5HT-R3A).
As we reported previously,154 expression
of this mutant receptor in either the ven-
tral right or the dorsal left blastomere ran-
domized LR patterning, but the effect was
significantly greater when expressed on the
ventral right (Fig. 5C)—in cells that do not
contribute to nodal flow.

In a final example, we examined the
effects of a mutant kinesin, Kif3B, on
LR patterning. Kinesins have previously
been implicated in mouse LR asymmetry
[PAGE 11] (interpreted as ciliary defects178) but also
have intracellular transport roles.54,70 Injec-
tions at 1-cell were the most effective at
randomizing the LR axis, with 24% of
injected embryos developing heterotaxia
(Fig. 5D). At 4-cell, injections in the dor-
sal left blastomere also induced significant
levels of heterotaxia, but injections in the
ventral right blastomere were not effective.
To determine whether Kif3B affects LR
patterning solely because of its role in cilia,
we utilized the protocol described in Strat-
egy 3 above, injecting the mutant Kif3B
mRNA construct during the early 1-cell
stage in biased locations of the embryo.
When we post-sorted the embryos based
on the localization of a co-injected lin-
eage label, we found that injections corre-
sponding to the GRP and the dorsal right
of the embryo were highly effective (47%
heterotaxia; Fig. 5E). Surprisingly, we also
observed significant heterotaxia in embryos
where the construct was targeted far from
the GRP (i.e., corresponding to the ventral
right blastomere, 20% heterotaxia). These
results suggest that there is a likely role for
Kif3B in the GRP, but that there are other
early roles for Kif3B that are distinct from
ciliary flow.

Collectively, these examples illustrate
experimental design that facilitates an
unbiased study of determinants of the LR
pathway, and provide tools to dissect out
those that act independent of ciliary flow.
Similar to what was shown previously for
both a-tubulin and y-tubulin-containing
complexes,106 alterations in TBCB at the
1-cell stage significantly affect LR pattern-
ing whereas expression of mutant TBCB in
later stages has no effect on the LR axis. It is
crucial that these strategies also be extended
to reagents that regulate chromatid segre-
gation, to begin to truly test that model in
the context of known downstream compo-
nents of LR patterning.

Future Prospects

A number of key open questions remain
in the study of LR asymmetry. One major
issue surrounds the identification of the
best animal model to understand how the
LR axis is established in humans, in order
to study human laterality diseases in the
optimal biological context. As we have
noted previously, the mouse may not be
[PAGE 12] a good model for understanding human
LR pathologies.61,62 Compared with other
amniotes like chick and pig, the mouse
has a fundamentally different embry-
onic bodyplan and major differences in
LR patterning steps39; diseases that are
known to respect the midline in humans
(i.e., CHILD syndrome, which produces
LR-bilateral separation of pigmentation
in human patients) have mosaic patterns
in the mouse.179-181 Thus, while the mouse
may not be the best animal model to under-
stand the mechanisms responsible for lat-
erality in humans, it remains to be shown
which alternative model may be better. A
promising possibility is afforded by the pig
and rabbit, if techniques for manipulating
much earlier stages than gastrulation can
be developed.39,182,183

The data from frog embryos suggest
a scheme in which physiological signal-
ing amplifies single-cell chirality into
gene expression on a large scale. This is
remarkably similar to what has been seen
in C. elegans93,132,184 and snails.185 Thus, it
is plausible that not only proteins such as
a-tubulin are highly conserved, but also
general schemes for leveraging body asym-
metry from molecular chirality may be
likewise conserved between vertebrates and
invertebrates.

The cilia model of LR asymmetry is
bolstered by the fact that human patients
and animal mutants with ciliopathies often
have LR patterning defects.37,186-188 Yet, the
interpretation of these studies’ data almost
universally omits the fact that “ciliary”
proteins also have intracellular functions.
Indeed it is a prediction of the intracel-
lular model that defects in MTOC or
related cytoskeletal proteins will produce
laterality defects and, as a side effect, a cili-
ary phenotype. Although these functions
are difficult to dissociate in organisms in
which non-node cells cannot easily be tar-
geted with reagents, a few mutations have
now been characterized that show that
LR phenotypes and ciliary properties do
not track together as well as is commonly
thought.41,43-46,154

Moving forward, it is clear that these
mutant proteins should be examined in
a number of animal models including
mouse, frog, fish, and chick, with specific
attention to possible early roles as distinct
from ciliary functions. Disruptions to these
proteins that are limited to the cells that
contribute to the ciliated node, as well as
disruptions that are limited to all of the
cells except those contributing to the node,
are expected to bring to light the role of
cytoskeletal proteins in LR patterning. This
type of study design will help to determine
whether these “ciliary” proteins are acting
in the LR pathway solely due to their roles
in the cilia, or whether they play a wider
part in the intracellular cytoskeleton. The
very recent finding of actin filament-con-
taining filopodia that cross the blastocoel
and deliver vesicles across relatively large
distances in the developing embryo189 will
also have to be considered with respect to
their possible contribution to the redistri-
bution of molecular cargo.

It is also clear that more quantitative
data are needed to better study the effects
of molecular genetic reagents and manip-
ulations on LR patterning. We have con-
ducted a number of meta-analyses of the
literature quantifying statistical relation-
ships between penetrance of reagents on
asymmetric gene expression and on asym-
metric organ situs.62,154,190 These analyses
suggest gaps in the 3-step pathway from
symmetry breaking to asymmetric organ
placement (Fig. 1); there may be uniden-
tified mechanisms acting as check-points
throughout the LR pathway, allowing for
some laterality errors to be corrected dur-
ing embryogenesis.191 Quantitative data
have been extremely helpful in comparing
ciliary parameters with laterality outcomes
in zebrafish,154 yet similar robust measures
of cilia number, length, and flow rates are
not available for the mouse model because
few studies have assessed these endpoints,
and those that did typically provide large
ranges for the measured values and often
rely on data from only 2 or 3 embryos in
a treatment class,62 which makes statistical
evaluation impossible.

Finally, discussions within the LR com-
munity have identified some frustrations
with the laterality models and the idea that
one is correct and the others must be wrong.
In a first step to a potential conciliation, we
proposed the unified model of LR asymme-
try, which postulates that cilia may have a
role in amplifying LR information in some
species, downstream of highly conserved
cytoskeletal events that initiate asymme-
try. Experiments could test whether cilia
[PAGE 13] have an amplifying role in the LR pathway:
reagents that target early mechanisms (i.e.,
BDM or mutant a-tubulin mRNAs, which
affect the cytoskeleton but are only effec-
tive very early) could be combined with
reagents that directly disrupt ciliary flow
(i.e., methylcellulose injected into the GRP,
which changes the viscosity of the fluid in
this space) to determine whether additive
effects can be obtained. This would also
address the speculative proposal62 that in
any population of embryos, some are utiliz-
ing different pathways than others to reach
correct asymmetry (thus explaining why
the penetrance of any one type of inhibi-
tion is often incomplete at the level of the
population, but very effective for some
number of specific individuals).

In conclusion, evidence from a number
of species points to the intracellular cyto-
skeleton as the initiator of LR asymmetry.

[PAGE 13] REFERENCES

28. Spéder P, Petzoldt A, Suzanne M, Noselli S. Strategies to establish left/right asymmetry in vertebrates and invertebrates. Curr Opin Genet Dev 2007; 17:351-8; PMID:17643981; http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.gde.2007.05.008
…
207. Nonaka S, Shiratori H, Saijoh Y, Hamada H. Determination of left-right patterning of the mouse embryo by artificial nodal flow. Nature 2002; 418:96-9; PMID:12097914; http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/nature00849