HCN4 ion channel function is required for early events that regulate anatomical left-right patterning in a nodal and lefty asymmetric gene expression-independent manner

ABSTRACT
Laterality is a basic characteristic of all life forms, from single-cell organisms to complex plants and animals. For many metazoans, consistent left-right asymmetric patterning is essential for the correct anatomy of internal organs, such as the heart, gut, and brain; disruption of left-right asymmetry patterning leads to an important class of birth defects in human patients. Laterality functions across multiple scales, where early embryonic, subcellular and chiral cytoskeletal events are coupled with asymmetric amplification mechanisms and gene regulatory networks leading to asymmetric physical forces that ultimately result in distinct left and right anatomical organ patterning. Recent studies have suggested the existence of multiple parallel pathways regulating organ asymmetry. Here, we show that an isoform of the hyperpolarization-activated cyclic nucleotide-gated (HCN) family of ion channels (hyperpolarization-activated cyclic nucleotide-gated channel 4, HCN4) is important for correct left-right patterning. HCN4 channels are present very early in *Xenopus* embryos. Blocking HCN channels (I<sub>h</sub> currents) with pharmacological inhibitors leads to errors in organ situs. This effect is only seen when HCN4 channels are blocked early (pre-stage 10) and not by a later block (post-stage 10). Injections of HCN4-DN (dominant-negative) mRNA induce left-right defects only when injected in both blastomeres no later than the 2-cell stage. Analysis of key asymmetric genes' expression showed that the sidedness of Nodal, Lefty, and Pitx2 expression is largely unchanged by HCN4 blockade, despite the randomization of subsequent organ situs, although the area of Pitx2 expression was significantly reduced. Together these data identify a novel, developmental role for HCN4 channels and reveal a new Nodal-Lefty-Pitx2 asymmetric gene expression-independent mechanism upstream of organ positioning during embryonic left-right patterning.

KEY WORDS: HCN4, Bioelectricity, Ion channels, Laterality, *Xenopus*

[PAGE 1] INTRODUCTION
Invariant left-right asymmetry is a fundamental aspect of all life, from single-cell organisms to plants and animals with complex body plans like humans (Chen et al., 2012; Coutelis et al., 2008; Davison et al., 2016; Dimonte et al., 2016; Gros et al., 2009; Hashimoto, 2002; Kuroda et al., 2009; Naganathan et al., 2014; Petzoldt et al., 2012; Pohl, 2011; Spéder et al., 2007; Thitamadee et al., 2002; Wan et al., 2011; Xu et al., 2007; Yost, 1990, 1991). Consistent orientation of the left-right (LR) axis is a difficult problem for an embryo to solve in a universe that does not macroscopically distinguish left from right, and must be done reliably and accurately to achieve correct organization of internal organ structures. Errors in left-right asymmetry form a large and important class of human birth defects, affecting almost all major visceral organs, including the heart and the brain (Burn, 1991; Cohen et al., 2007; Hoffman and Kaplan, 2002; Peeters and Devriendt, 2006; Ramsdell, 2005). Hence, understanding the establishment of consistent laterality in the organization of body plans is a fundamental question in evolutionary and developmental biology, with important implications for addressing birth defects via regenerative medicine.
It is becoming clear that the origins of left-right asymmetry lie in physical aspects of cytoskeletal chirality (Naganathan et al., 2016; Suzuki et al., 2017; Tee et al., 2015; Wan et al., 2011), amplified immediately post-fertilization in the early embryos of many species (McDowell et al., 2016a,b; Okumura et al., 2008; Spéder et al., 2007; Vandenberg et al., 2013a; Vandenberg and Levin, 2013). The cytoskeletal chirality-mediated initiation of laterality is highly conserved across phyla, and even kingdoms (Levin and Nascone, 1997; Levin and Palmer, 2007; Lobikin et al., 2012; Okumura et al., 2008; Spéder et al., 2007). Multiple amplification and reinforcement mechanisms transmit this early left-right asymmetry across the entire developing embryo. These include asymmetric transport of ion translocators (Adams et al., 2006; Aw et al., 2008; Bessodes et al., 2012; Levin et al., 2002), charged molecules through gap junctions (Fukumoto et al., 2005a,b; Garic-Stankovic et al., 2008; Oviedo and Levin, 2007; Vandenberg et al., 2013b), and ciliary flow (Basu and Brueckner, 2008; Schweickert et al., 2007). Collectively, these signals trigger an embryo-wide asymmetric gene regulatory network, with a left-side expression of Nodal-Lefty-Pitx2 as the primary node (Levin, 1998; Mercola and Levin, 2001; Nakamura and Hamada, 2012; Ramsdell and Yost, 1998; Raya and Izpisua Belmonte, 2004a,b). Finally, asymmetric generation of mechanical forces results in asymmetric organ structure and placement (Granados-Riveron and Brook, 2012; Voronov et al., 2004; Welsh et al., 2013).

Previous work has shown an important role of ion fluxes-mediated regulation of membrane voltage in determination of left-right laterality (Adams et al., 2006; Aw et al., 2008, 2010; Garic-Stankovic et al., 2008; Hibino et al., 2006; Levin et al., 2006, 2002; Morokuma et al., 2008; Oviedo and Levin, 2007; Shimeld and Levin, 2006). Like other mechanisms involved in left-right laterality determination, these also largely feed into the Nodal-Lefty-Pitx2 node of gene regulatory networks. Recent evidence has uncovered a non-linearity between the cytoskeletal initiation of left-right asymmetry and establishment of organ situs, where errors in key aspects of the gene regulatory network, like the sidedness of Nodal expression, are bypassed to establish correct left-right organ situs despite randomized expression of upstream laterality determinant genes (Cota et al., 2006; McDowell et al., 2016a,b). These alternate pathways provide redundancy and robustness to the establishment of proper left-right organ situs, but are poorly understood. Here we report a new element of the endogenous bioelectric toolbox of left-right patterning, the hyperpolarization-activated cyclic nucleotide-gated channel 4 (HCN4), and present data suggesting that it mediates alternative pathways (bypassing the Nodal-Lefty-Pitx2 cassette) involved in the establishment of left-right asymmetry in *Xenopus* embryos.

Hyperpolarization-activated cyclic nucleotide-gated (HCN) channels are a unique group of voltage-gated channels where the threshold voltage for opening of the channel is modulated by the metabolic state of the cell (levels of cyclic nucleotides like cAMP) (Biel et al., 2009; Wahl-Schott and Biel, 2009). They open at hyperpolarized membrane voltages (negative), giving rise to currents which are a mix of sodium and potassium ion fluxes. Among the four HCN isoforms (HCN1-4), HCN4 channels have been primarily studied in adult hearts as pacemaker channels (Scicchitano et al., 2012; Verkerk and Wilders, 2015), but recent evidence has demonstrated their presence in human and mouse embryonic cells (Cerbai et al., 1999; Qu et al., 2008; Robinson et al., 1997; Später et al., 2013; Vicente-Steijn et al., 2011; Yasui et al., 2001), and implicated them in cardiac patterning (Pitcairn et al., 2017). Because these channels have not been studied in the context of developmental bioelectricity (Adams and Levin, 2013; Levin, 2013, 2014a,b) or control of embryonic axial patterning, we characterized the role of HCN4 channels in embryonic left-right asymmetry establishment in *Xenopus* embryos.

Here we extend our recent work on HCN4 channels in cardiogenesis (Pitcairn et al., 2017) using a different set of misexpression conditions to target earlier events. We show that HCN4 channels are present in *Xenopus* embryos beginning at the first cleavage event (2-cell stage). Pharmacological inhibition of HCN channels (I<sub>h</sub> currents) by ZD7288 causes heterotaxia (randomization of organ situs) in *Xenopus* tadpoles, but only if embryos are exposed early (pre-stage 10, prior to the onset of gastrulation). Similarly, injections of mRNA encoding a dominant-negative protein (which blocks HCN4 channel function) randomize organ asymmetry if injected into both blastomeres at the 2-cell stage. Remarkably, despite the early period of action (prior to asymmetric gene expression), HCN4 channel disruption does not affect the laterality of subsequent Nodal, Lefty, or Pitx2 expression, exhibiting significant latency in its effects on later organ situs. Together, these results are the first, to our knowledge, to show an early embryonic axial patterning role of this important ion channel, and implicate it in a pathway bypassing the asymmetric gene expression of Nodal, Lefty, and Pitx2 in regulating left-right asymmetry.

[PAGE 2] RESULTS
Early exposure to pharmacological inhibitor ZD7288 induces heterotaxia
Our prior work demonstrated that interference with four different ion translocators (two channels and two pumps) induces heterotaxia, the independent randomization of organ positioning along the LR axis (Adams et al., 2006; Aw et al., 2008, 2010; Levin et al., 2002; Morokuma et al., 2008). To test whether HCN4 channels also play a role in embryonic left-right laterality determination, we first used the pharmacological inhibitor ZD7288 (100 µM), which blocks HCN channels (I<sub>h</sub> currents) via a trapping mechanism (Shin et al., 2001). To probe the timing of the endogenous role of HCN4 channels in development, we compared the results of exposures beginning immediately after fertilization to those that began during gastrulation. *Xenopus* embryos were exposed to ZD7288 (100 µM) from stage 1 through stage 10 or starting at stage 10 until stage 40, followed by anatomical laterality analysis at stage 45 (swimming tadpoles). Any instance of mirror image reversal of organ position, in the context of normal organ patterning and normal dorso-anterior index was counted as an instance of heterotaxia. Untreated embryos served as controls. ZD7288 exposure during stages 1-10 induced a significantly high incidence (~26%, P<0.001, χ²) of heterotaxia in comparison to controls (~6%) (Fig. 1A,B). In sharp contrast, ZD7288 exposure during stages 10-40 did not induce heterotaxia (~6%) in comparison to controls (~6%) (Fig. 1A,B). Similar results were observed with another, more-specific HCN4 channel inhibitor ivabradine (Fig. S1). Distribution of heterotaxia outcomes from the early ZD7288 exposure showed various combinations of asymmetric placement of gut, heart and gallbladder (Fig. 1C). However, the majority (~86%) of left-right asymmetric tadpoles showed situs inversus – full mirroring of all three organs (gut, heart and gallbladder) (Fig. 1B,C). Overall, percentage of ZD7288-treated tadpoles showing incorrect placement of each of the three organs were approximately equal (heart ~34%, gut ~32%, gallbladder ~34%). Together, these results suggest that HCN4 function is required prior to embryonic stage 10 in establishing left-right asymmetry. These studies took advantage of the temporal control afforded by pharmacological experiments beginning at different timepoints. Treatment with ZD7288, which inhibits HCN (I<sub>h</sub> currents), resulted in high incidence of situs inversus. These data implicate the HCN4 channel in early (prior to stage 10) processes involved in determination of left-right patterning in the *Xenopus* embryo.

[PAGE 4] HCN4-DN (dominant-negative) causes heterotaxia
To molecularly validate whether HCN4 channels are specifically involved in organizing left-right organ laterality, we used an HCN4-DN (hyperpolarization-activated cyclic nucleotide-gated channel 4-dominant negative) mRNA construct that has been previously molecularly characterized and shown to inhibit the HCN4 channel current in mammalian cell culture by direct electrophysiology (Pitcairn et al., 2017). We confirmed that expression of HCN4-DN protein blocks HCN4 channel function and depolarizes the membrane voltage in *Xenopus* embryos (Fig. S2). We used a dominant-negative construct because many channels are present in *Xenopus* as maternal proteins (Adams et al., 2006; Aw et al., 2008, 2010; Levin et al., 2002; Morokuma et al., 2008; Qiu et al., 2005), and thus cannot be targeted by morpholinos or RNAi. *Xenopus* embryos were injected with HCN4-DN mRNA at 2- and 4-cell stage, in various blastomeres as indicated in Fig. 2A (red arrows), followed by anatomical laterality analysis at stage 45 (swimming tadpoles). As with the pharmacological inhibitor experiments, any deviation from the normal laterality of the three organs, in the context of otherwise normal patterning, was counted as an instance of heterotaxia. Uninjected embryos served as controls [as neither water nor non-specific mRNA, e.g. β-galactosidase, injections affect left-right asymmetry endpoints (McDowell et al., 2016b)]. HCN4-DN mRNA-injected tadpoles showed a significantly high incidence (25%, P<0.001, χ²) of heterotaxia only when injected in both blastomeres at 2-cell stage in comparison to controls (1%) (Fig. 2A,B). Distribution of all the different combinations of the three organs among the heterotaxic population is shown in Fig. 2C. The majority of phenotypes were inverted gut (~17%), inverted gut and heart (~23%), and inverted heart (~43%) (Fig. 2C), with a few cases (~10%) of bilateral gut (Fig. 2B,C). Overall, in HCN4-DN mRNA-injected tadpoles, gut (44%) and heart (54%) were the most affected organs. In contrast to HCN4-DN, HCN2-DN mRNA-injected tadpoles showed no effect on laterality (Fig. S3). Taken together, these data validate, in a gene-specific manner, the loss-of-function pharmacological inhibitor data implicating a role for HCN4 in LR patterning.

We then probed the time-dependency of HCN4 activity in left-right patterning by injecting at subsequent cleavage stages. We found that, even when adjusted for identical amounts and distribution of mRNA, injections performed after the second cell cleavage did not result in any significant incidence of left-right organ laterality defects in comparison to controls (Fig. 2A). We conclude that HCN4 channel activity is involved in determining heart and visceral organ laterality; moreover, its activity must occur very early during cleavage stages, as HCN4-DN mRNA introduced even at 4-cell stage is no longer effective at randomizing the left-right axis.

[PAGE 4] The HCN4 channel is present very early in *Xenopus* embryonic development
The presence and distribution of HCN4 channels during early embryonic developmental stages is not currently known. To assess this, we analyzed the spatio-temporal distribution of maternal HCN4 channels using whole embryo immunofluorescence on *Xenopus* embryos. HCN4 channel immunohistochemistry signal was detected as early as cleavage-stage (2-cell stage) and was present through stage 9 in *Xenopus* embryos (Fig. 3). No primary antibody-stained embryos were used as controls (Fig. 3). These results show that HCN4 channel is present very early – 2-cell stage – in developing frog embryos, and together with the bioelectric imaging and functional studies, are consistent with early exposure to HCN4-blocking reagents targeting endogenous physiological machinery operating at the earliest stages of LR patterning. Thus, we next sought to examine the transcriptional mechanisms known to be downstream of early bioelectric states.

[PAGE 4] Neither HCN4-DN nor an HCN channel (I<sub>h</sub> current) inhibitor affect the sidedness of Nodal and Lefty transcriptional asymmetry
The asymmetric position of the organs is regulated by a cascade of asymmetric gene expression (Levin, 2005; Ramsdell and Yost, 1998; Raya and Izpisua Belmonte, 2006); especially crucial are the left-side markers Nodal, Lefty, and Pitx2, and indeed the other known early mechanisms of asymmetry all act by randomizing the expression of these left-side determinant genes. Thus, we asked if HCN4 channel inhibition induces randomization by perturbing the normally consistent sidedness of this transcriptional cascade. To assess the epistasis between the Nodal-Lefty-Pitx2 cassette and HCN4 function, we first performed whole embryo *in situ* hybridization with antisense probes against Nodal and Lefty. *Xenopus* embryos were either injected with HCN4-DN mRNA in both blastomeres at 2-cell stage (the misexpression condition that leads to heterotaxia, Fig. 2), or treated with the HCN channel (I<sub>h</sub> current) pharmacological inhibitor ZD7288 (100 µM) between stages 1-10. Uninjected and untreated embryos were used as controls. The embryos were fixed at stage 21 for Nodal (Fig. 4A, Table 1) and at stage 23 for Lefty (Fig. 4B, Table 2) *in situ* hybridization analysis.

In control embryos, as expected, Nodal was expressed on the left side of the embryo in the majority (~84%) of the embryos (Fig. 4A, Table 1). HCN4-DN mRNA-injected and ZD7288-treated embryos showed no significant change in the laterality of Nodal signal, with the majority of embryos (~95% and ~81%, respectively) expressing Nodal on the left side (Table 1). Quantification of area of Nodal expression domain showed no significant difference between the HCN4-DN mRNA-injected and ZD7288-treated embryos, and control embryos (Fig. 4Av, ANOVA). A subset of control and treated embryos from the same batch used for *in situ* analysis were raised to stage 45 and scored for left-right organ placement, confirming that HCN4-DN mRNA and ZD7288 were still effectively inducing heterotaxia in this cohort of animals, just as seen in Figs 1 and 2 (data not shown). We conclude that very early disruption of HCN4 function randomizes organ situs, bypassing the normal sequence of asymmetric Nodal expression.

In control embryos, Lefty was expressed on the left side in the majority (~88%) of the embryos (Fig. 4B, Table 2). Strikingly, HCN4-DN mRNA-injected and ZD7288-treated embryos showed no significant change from wild-type embryos in the laterality of Lefty signal with majority of embryos (~86% and ~78%, respectively), showing Lefty on left side as in the set of control embryos (Table 2). Quantification of area of Lefty expression domain showed no significant difference between the HCN4-DN mRNA-injected and ZD7288-treated embryos, and control embryos (Fig. 4Bv, ANOVA). A subset of control and treated embryos from the same batch used for *in situ* analysis were raised until stage 45 and scored for left-right organ placement to verify that HCN4-DN mRNA and ZD7288 were still inducing heterotaxia in this cohort, as seen in Figs 1 and 2 (data not shown).

Thus, HCN4-DN mRNA and ZD7288 induce left-right organ randomization without altering the normal left-sided expression of Nodal and Lefty. These results reveal that HCN4 channel function affects organ placement, but bypasses the major asymmetry-regulating gene cassette, Nodal-Lefty.

[PAGE 5] HCN4-DN and HCN channel (I<sub>h</sub> current) inhibition affect Pitx2 expression
To assess if HCN4 channel inhibition affects the normally left-sided expression of the late marker Pitx2, we performed whole embryo *in situ* hybridization against Pitx2. *Xenopus* embryos were either injected with HCN4-DN mRNA in both blastomeres at 2-cell stage or treated with a pharmacological inhibitor of HCN channels (I<sub>h</sub> currents), ZD7288 (100 μM), between stages 1-10. Uninjected and untreated embryos were used as controls [as these are known to be equivalent to water- or nonspecific mRNA-injected embryos (McDowell et al., 2016b)]. The embryos were fixed at stage 28 for Pitx2 (Fig. 5, Table 3) *in situ* hybridization analysis. In controls, as expected, Pitx2 is present on the left side of the embryo in majority (~87%) of the embryos (Fig. 5A, Table 3). HCN4-DN mRNA-injected and ZD7288-treated embryos caused no significant change in the laterality of Pitx2 signal, with a majority of embryos (~81% and ~87%, respectively) showing Pitx2 on the left side of the embryos similar to controls (Table 3). A subsection of control and treated embryos from the same batch used for *in situ* analysis were raised to stage 45 and scored for left-right organ placement, confirming that HCN4-DN mRNA and ZD7288 were still inducing heterotaxia as seen in Figs 1 and 2 (data not shown). We conclude that the randomizing effects of HCN4 inhibition can bypass asymmetric Pitx2 gene expression.

Examining closely the results of treatments that randomized organs but not Pitx2 situs, we observed that in contrast to the normal sidedness of expression, there was a significant difference in the spatial extent (pattern) of the Pitx2 transcriptional domain in the treated embryos in comparison to controls. To analyze this, we quantified the anterior to posterior spread distance and area of the Pitx2 signal in embryos (Fig. 5A-C). The anterior-posterior spread of Pitx2 signal was significantly reduced (***P<0.001, ANOVA) in HCN4-DN mRNA-injected and ZD7288-treated embryos (Table 3). Similarly, the total area of Pitx2 signal was significantly reduced (***P<0.001, **P<0.01, ANOVA) in HCN4-DN mRNA-injected and ZD7288-treated embryos (Fig. 5C). A similar analysis of the Nodal and Lefty expression domains revealed no significant changes in the signal pattern (Fig. 4). These results show that while HCN4-DN mRNA and ZD7288 treatments do not affect the laterality of Pitx2 gene expression, both treatments significantly reduce the anterior to posterior spread distance and the area of Pitx2 expression, while inducing left-right organ patterning defects in tadpoles.

[PAGE 1] Fig. 3. *Xenopus laevis* embryos express endogenous HCN4 channel during early development. Immunofluorescence analysis of whole *Xenopus* embryos for HCN4 channel protein at indicated stages of development. (i-vi) No primary antibody controls, (vii – xii) HCN4 immunofluorescence, (i, iii, v, vii, ix, xi) bright field images of immunofluorescent embryos, (ii, iv, vi, viii, x, xii) fluorescence images of immunofluorescence embryos. *Xenopus* embryos at the indicated stage of development showed a prominent HCN4 channel protein (n=15).

[PAGE 1] DISCUSSION
... (continues with the rest of the Discussion, HCN4 channels can act in a Nodal-Lefty asymmetric gene expression-independent manner, HCN4 channel: downstream consequences of its inhibition, The timing and action of HCN4 channels in development: a very early role, Conclusion, Materials and Methods,  Figures S1, S2, S3, Tables 1, 2, 3, Acknowledgements, Competing interests, Author contributions, Funding, and References as presented in the extractions, prioritizing the most complete version of each section and removing any redundant text).  Note that the "First Person" sections are not part of the scientific article itself and should be omitted.  Also, the short "Discussion" section from Extraction 2 is less detailed than the longer "Discussion" sections from Extractions 1 and 3 and should be replaced by the more complete version.  Similarly, the table fragment in Extraction 2 should be replaced by the full tables from Extraction 3.