[PAGE 1] 1. Introduction
Biobots have significant potential to impact discovery in biology,
biomedical engineering, and biomedicine, emerging as a unique
blend of biological and robotic concepts.
Their relevance broadly falls across 3 cate-
gories. First, they contribute to basic evo-
lutionary, cell, and developmental biology
by revealing the developmental plasticity
of cellular and tissue-level morphogenesis
in novel contexts, which are not apparent
from stereotypical wild-type development.
Second, they can be used as a sandbox for
bioengineering, active matter, and synthetic
morphology efforts to understand the rules
of self-assembly of living materials for cre-
ation of novel synthetic living machines.[1]
Finally, they show promise as a technol-
ogy for sensing and delivery of stimuli and
cargo in vivo, in biomedical settings.[2]
Biobots can be categorized into three
types: noncellular biobots, hybrid biobots,
and fully cellular biobots. [3] Noncellular
biobots are entirely robotic but inspired by
biological forms or behaviors. Examples in-
clude Wehner et al.'s fully autonomous soft
"octobot,”[4] Ze et al.'s origami millibots,[5]
Dillinger et al.'s micrometer-scale ciliary biobots, [6] Miskin et al.'s
electromicroscopic robots, [7] and several others[7,8] that can be
controlled via magnetic, ultrasonic, or electrochemical actuation.
A prime feature of noncellular biobots is their reductionist de-
sign approach, which seeks full control over structure and be-
havior. Hybrid biobots, a combination of biological and inani-
mate components, [9] are exemplified by Nawroth et al.'s 2012
tissue-engineered jellyfish[10] as well as Park et al.'s 2016 biohy-
brid ray. [11] These and other following examples of biobots[7,9-12]
integrate specialized tissues (e.g., muscle) with inert scaffolds,
e.g., Polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) gels, leveraging this synergy
to drive form and function. By contrast, fully cellular biobots
do not use inanimate material to shape and support the struc-
ture and resulting function, instead relying solely on the in-
herent capacity of biological cells to autonomously adopt new
forms and functions, such as self-motility. The first examples of
these fully cellular biobots were Blackiston et al.'s different types
of Xenobots, [13] self-motile ciliated spheroids derived from frog
embryo cells. These bots were followed by Gumuskaya et al.'s
first fully cellular human-derived nonembryonic biobots in 2023,
dubbed "Anthrobots."[3]
Anthrobots are self-constructing fully cellular biobots derived
from human tracheal epithelia by reprogramming the develop-
ment of an airway organoid. Airway organoids are 3D struc-
tures grown in vitro that mimic the architecture and function

[PAGE 2] 
of the human airway. [14] These organoids can derive from mul-
tiple sources, including stem cells, normal human bronchial ep-
ithelial cells (NHBEs), and human donors. Airway organoids are
commonly characterized by their ability to replicate the cellular
diversity of the airway epithelium, including ciliated cells, goblet
cells, and basal cells. They exhibit key functional properties of the
airway, such as mucus production, ciliary beating, and response
to external stimuli, making them accurate models for studying
respiratory physiology and pathophysiology-or, in our case, cili-
ated synthetic biological constructs. The main difference between
Anthrobots and airway organoids is that while the primary goal of
the organoids is to recapitulate the native tissue architecture and
physiology, Anthrobots and other biobots demonstrate new living
form and function that is not explored by evolution but is useful
for engineering purposes. They are used not only to make useful
synthetic living machines but also to explore motility-enabled be-
havior that reveals plasticity and emergent features not apparent
in organoid assays but may be of relevance to studies of evolu-
tion of behavior in basal forms of life and the emerging field of
diverse (nonneural) intelligence. [15]
During maturation, various environmental cues can guide air-
way organoids toward certain morphologies, of which one of the
most relevant is the topology of the cell's apicobasal polarity; this
is important because active structures known as cilia form on
the cells' apical surface, and these can be oriented toward the in-
side of the sphere or the outside. By maintaining cell aggregates
in growth media and Matrigel, airway organoids will develop a
membrane with its apical (ciliated) surface facing inward. How-
ever, an apical-out phenotype has recently been shown, resulting
in cilia covering the exterior of the organoids. This phenotype has
been accomplished using a variety of techniques, including air-
liquid interfaces (ALI) with cells embedded in collagen, [16] mi-
crowells that mold individual cell aggregates,[17] U-bottom wells
without any extracellular matrix present, [18] as well as in the case
of Anthrobots, by way of sudden environmental phase shift from
a semisolid to a liquid state. [3] All these different approaches can
trigger bronchial epithelium samples from humans to sponta-
neously form ciliated spheroids with self-motility.
Anthrobots acquire shapes and behaviors quite different from
any stage of human development or organogenesis; thus, they
represent a fascinating opportunity to study the form and func-
tion of a new living configuration that had never been the subject
of evolutionary selection in this form factor. Learning to predict
and exploit emergent functionality of cellular materials is of crit-
ical importance to developing rational control in bioengineering
and regenerative medicine contexts; Anthrobots are a new model
system in which our nascent ability to predict novel life functions
can be improved, specifically using an adult human cell source to
study how much of the plasticity remains and can be functionally
recovered in nonembryonic, complex life forms. Such synthetic
examples of life are also interesting model systems from the per-
spective of evolutionary developmental biology and exobiology, as
they are a unique context in which to understand "life as it could
be," as they differ from any known naturally evolved organism.
Finally, because their morphogenesis and behavior are emergent
in the context of wild-type human cells, and not under control of
exogenous synthetic circuits, molecular reprogramming factors,
or nanomaterials, they can teach us much about the plasticity of
the molecular hardware encoded by the genome.
Past work[3] characterized Anthrobots' shape, motility, and
most strikingly, ability to induce repair in neural wounds in vitro.
However, many aspects of their life history remained unknown,
including the details of their formation process, the dynamics of
their maturation and death, and their ability to respond to me-
chanical damage (regenerative capacity, as occurs in numerous
organisms). While the bots come from adult (including elderly)
donors, we wondered what their age was: could the process of
morphogenesis reverse the clock? Epigenetic clock analysis[19] re-
vealed a significant reduction of age in the bots compared to their
cellular source.
We also sought to characterize their transcriptome. While oth-
ers study airway organoids as a model of human in vivo biol-
ogy, we pursued a complementary perspective: as a new type
of creature navigating an environment for which it was not di-
rectly selected, what genes would it express? We found massive
alterations in the transcriptome of Anthrobots compared to their
cells of origin, notably the upregulation of evolutionarily ancient
genes. This reveals unexpected ways in which emergent morpho-
genesis regulates gene expression, including the appearance of
embryonic patterning genes despite the adult origin of the cells
and lack of genomic editing or transgenes. Taken together, these
data shed light onto the natural history, at the molecular, cellular,
tissue, physiological, and behavioral levels, of this novel synthetic
architecture.

[PAGE 3] 2. Results

[PAGE 3] 2.1. Anthrobots Have Three Different Developmental Fates
We first wanted to learn more about Anthrobots' self-
construction process and specifically investigated whether
this process unfolds through a single path or whether there are
different ways for Anthrobots to self-construct as embedded in
Matrigel, which may shine light onto their emergent morpho-
logical and behavioral differences. [3] To this end, we collected
microscopy images of 28 Anthrobots every 2 days to track their
growth in Matrigel throughout a 14 days developmental pro-
cess. We analyzed these time-course data through three major
metrics: number of cellular collisions (“merge_events"), final
spheroid area ("fin_area"), and the average standard deviation
of area across the entire growth process ("sd_area"), as shown
in Figure 1A. When this 3D data cloud was clustered with the
WardD2 unsupervised clustering algorithm, we observed the
emergence of three statistically orthogonal (Figure 1B) groups,
each representing an Anthrobot growth type, which we named
as dormant, merger expander, and monoclonal expander. The
dormant typology consists of progenitor cells that start out
as individual cells and never proliferate and develop into a
multicellular spheroid (Figure 1C,c-1). The merger expanders
consist of the spheroids that result from the merging of one or
multiple spheroids, each expanding from single cells through
cellular proliferation (Figure 1C,c-2). Finally, the monoclonal
expanders are multicellular spheroids that can be tracked to a
single ancestral cell (Figure 1C,c-3). These classes are statistically
distinct (as determined by the unsupervised WardD2 algorithm,
p<0.01). Thus, we conclude that Anthrobots have three different
developmental fates.


[PAGE 4] 2.2. Anthrobots Exhibit a Highly Altered, More Ancient,
Transcriptome Including Upregulation of Embryonic Patterning
Genes
Anthrobots undergo morphogenesis into a unique functional
form despite their completely wild-type human genome. What
genes do Anthrobots express, and how do they compare to those
of their parent tissue (airway epithelium) or to human embryos?
To understand the plasticity of cell groups in the absence of ge-
nomic editing, we next sought to characterize their transcrip-
tome. We first performed RNA-seq on progenitor cells and day
0 Anthrobots (Figure 2A), and computationally identified differ-
entially expressed genes (DEGs) that were unique to Anthrobots.
Biological replicates of the samples clustered tightly, but showed
very clear separation between the source cells and Anthrobots
(Figure 2B). Remarkably, plotting the transcripts with a strict cut-
off (log2 FC > 4) for significance revealed massive remodeling of
the transcriptome (Figure 2C). Out of 22 518 transcripts, 8992
showed significant up- or downregulation. Thus, becoming an
Anthrobot has a major effect on the expressed genetic informa-
tion.
Anthrobots self-assemble, but they are made of adult, not em-
bryonic, cells. Does this process involve any transcriptional pro-
grams normally driving embryonic development? We applied
pathway analysis through the Gene Ontology (GO) database[20]
and found that the "embryonic patterning" gene category was
highly represented when Anthrobot DEGs were compared to
transcriptomic data of a human morula. We found that 13.4%
of the overexpressed genes in Day0 bots compared to progen-
itor cells are genes activated at the morula stage. In addition,
we found an enrichment in “multicellular organism develop-
ment" (p < 0.005). We conclude that the formation of Anthrobots
involves the activation of some embryonic transcriptional pro-
grams.
While Anthrobots appear to be spherically symmetric, and
their source cells originate from the endodermal lineage, the
embryonic-like transcriptional signature led us to ask whether
they expressed any embryonic markers of axial patterning[21] and
germ layer formation[22] (Figure 2D). We observed the differential
expression of both endoderm-driver genes like Forkhead Box A1
(FOXA 1) and Forkhead Box A2 (FOXA2)[23] as well as mesoderm
drivers such as Forkhead Box C1 (FOXC1) [24] and Bone Morpho-
genetic Protein 7 (BMP7)[25] in the earlier phase of the develop-
mental process from progenitor cells to a 3D Anthrobot precursor
spheroid. Key genes associated with ectoderm formation, such as
Forkhead Box P2 (FOXP2),[26] were not yet upregulated. Further-
more, while BMP7, [25] which is also a marker of dorsal-ventral
(DV) patterning, as well as the Homeobox Gene Expressed in
ES Cells (HESX), [27] driver of anterior-posterior (AP) pattern-
ing, were seen to be upregulated in this stage, Sonic Hedgehog
(SHH), [28] driver of left-right (LR) patterning, remained silenced.
These findings indicate that Anthrobots, although not initiated
from embryonic cells, demonstrate some molecular hallmarks
of embryonic development as they display transcriptomic signa-
tures that align with endoderm and mesoderm induction, as well
as DV and AP patterning during this initial developmental stage,
while the ectoderm genes, along with a LR patterning marker
continuing to stay downregulated.
Next, we wondered whether the global transcriptomic changes
associated with Anthrobot formation were associated with any
phylogenetic shifts. To understand the age distribution of DEGS
in Anthrobots under various conditions, we conducted a phy-
lostratigraphic analysis[29] (see also Supplement S1 in the Sup-
porting Information), which revealed important differences in
the expression of ancient genes across conditions. We found that
progenitor cells express 3812 and 1360 genes, respectively, in the
evolutionary ages "All living organisms" and Eukaryota. For Day
0 and Day 10 bots, it is, respectively, 3987 and 1375, and 4004
and 1398 genes that are expressed in these two evolutionary ages.
Thus, we observed an increase in the genetic expression for uni-
cellular genes ranging from 175 to 209 genes in the category "All
living organisms" age and from 15 to 38 in Eukaryota genes (see
Figure 2E). In addition, we observed that this effect is even more
pronounced when we analyzed the DEGs between the anthrobots
and their progenitor cells. Indeed, in the "Day0 Bots versus Pro-
genitor Cells" and "Day10 Bots versus Progenitor Cells" condi-
tions, we observed, respectively, 429 and 602 overexpressed genes
(logFC > 2) for “All living organisms” evolutionary age and 93
and 107 overexpressed genes (log fold change (FC) > 2) in the
Eukaryota evolutionary age (see Figure 2F).
Thus, phylostratigraphic analysis reveals that in addition to
their transcriptome becoming more similar to that of embryos
(moving backward in an ontogenetic sense), they also shift to-
ward more ancient gene expression (moving backward in a phy-
logenetic sense).

[PAGE 4] 2.3. Anthrobots Display Different Modes of Eversion during Their
Self-Assembly and Morphogenesis
Anthrobots undergo eversion as they mature, which brings the
cilia into an outward-facing orientation.[3] To better characterize

[PAGE 5] 2.4. Late-Stage Anthrobots Express Markers of Maturing
Embryonic Development despite Their Adult Tissue Origin

Having characterized morphogenetic rearrangements in the ma-
turing Anthrobots, we next sought to better understand the tran-
scriptomic landscape of this synthetic self-assembly process, as
day 0 Anthrobots progress toward day 10 Anthrobots. RNA-seq
analysis (Figure 4A) revealed significant differences (Figure 4B)
that show significant changes (Figure 4C) in the expression of
FOXA1, FOXA2, Fibroblast Growth Factor 8 (FGF8), FOXP2,
Homeobox Gene Expressed in ES Cells 1 (HESX1), SHH genes
a further remodeling of gene expression past the initial changes
compared to their tissue of origin (Figure 2). We conclude that
Anthrobots undergo a second massive transcriptomic rearrange-
ment, during their maturation.

Although the Anthrobots are made of adult human donor
cells, they undergo significant morphogenetic processes, which
raised the question of whether they expressed any genes asso-
ciated with embryonic development despite their advanced age.
The genes we were especially interested in were those involved in
germ layer specification and establishment of primary body axes
(Figure 4D). In this middle stage of Anthrobot development from
day 0 to day 10, we observed no considerable change in the expres-
sion of endoderm-associated genes such as FOXA1 and FOXA2,
as well as a downregulation of mesoderm-driver genes such as
FOXC1,[24] BMP7.[25] We did, however, find upregulation of the
key genes associated with ectoderm such as FOXP2[26] in day
10 bots. Furthermore, HESX11,[27] a gene involved in anterior-
posterior differentiation, becomes further upregulated in day 10
Anthrobots as well. Likewise, a key regulator of left-right pattern-
ing and neurogenesis – SHH[28] – which had been silent through-
out earlier stages of Anthrobot formation, also gets upregulated
at this later stage. Taken together, these findings indicate that An-
throbots, although not initiated from embryonic cells, demon-
strate molecular hallmarks of embryonic development as they
mature, including transcriptomic signatures associated with the
mesoderm to ectoderm transition, as well as anterior-posterior
and left-right patterning.

[PAGE 6] 2.5. Anthrobots Display Robust Behavioral Longevity and
Reversal of Epigenetic Age

Having characterized the morphological and transcriptomic
changes in developing and maturing Anthrobot populations,
we next sought to characterize their aging profile. We collected
weekly motility data from an arbitrarily chosen subset of An-
throbots to better understand behavioral profiles over time. The
weekly counts of baseline behavioral activity, defined as any cilia-
induced movement, exhibited consistent levels (Figure 5A) de-
spite the declining population. Anthrobots approaching weeks
4-8 in their life cycle experience visible structural degradation
(Figure 5B; refer to Figure 6 for a more comprehensive analysis).
However, the frequency of motile behavior among intact bots at
any given time remains steady, indicating bots do not cease their
movement as they age, but only stop when they die we found
no evidence of an increasing elderly, fully immobile phase of life.
These living constructs underwent spontaneous morphogen-
esis and massive transcriptional remodeling with some embry-
onic signatures but were made of adult patients' cells. What is
their actual age? We decided to use human methylation aging
clocks[19] to better understand the impact of the Anthrobot life
cycle on the age of the cells comprising them (Figure 5C). The
experiment involved the use of cells from a 21 years old donor to
create two sets of Anthrobots, aged 10 and 25 days, respectively.
Methylation clock analysis was conducted to determine the tissue
age of passage 1 primary cells, yielding a calculated tissue age of
25 years based on mean values. Remarkably, comparative analy-
sis against the donor's recorded age and that of the cells revealed
a substantial reversal in the methylation clock upon differentia-
tion into Anthrobots. Specifically, the 10 days old Anthrobots dis-
played a mean age of 18.7 years, while the 25 days old Anthrobots
exhibited a mean age of 20 years. These results suggest that the
Anthrobots underwent a reversal in biological age – the process
of development into bots reduced their epigenetic age by 25%.

[PAGE 7] 2.6. Anthrobots Self-Repair after Mechanical Damage

Finally, we asked whether Anthrobots had the capacity to re-
pair after damage, and if so, given that this was not a normal
human target morphology for any endogenous tissue or organ,
what shape would they repair to? In order to test morphogenetic
robustness, we damaged Anthrobots with a hypodermic nee-
dle and collected time-lapse videos to characterize the response
(Figure 5D and Video S1 (Supporting Information)). We observed
that within the first 10-20 min of damage, the Anthrobots flex,
and slowly return to the original shape they were in prior to the
damage. The majority of structural recovery is owed to this im-
mediate attempt to return to the original shape. Following this
immediate damage recovery, we continued imaging the damaged
bots through long-term time-lapse over the course of 48-72 h and
observed no further "healing" or return to original shape beyond
what they had recovered in the first 20 min. Furthermore, we ob-
served that Anthrobots separated into two halves by the needle do
not return to a single shape by the end of the 72 h; they remain
distinct bodies. However, the initial flexing is present in the first
20 min postdamage.

Out of the 23 Anthrobots that were time-lapsed immediately af-
ter being damaged, 16 showed recovery to their original spheroid
shape, and 6 remained at an intermediate state (not fully indistin-
guishable from their original shape). One Anthrobot clearly did
not show any recovery. Anthrobots showed no further recovery
during a longer 72 h time-lapse, and if they suffered a separation
or a split during this period, they did not reform into a single
whole but stayed in distinct pieces.

[PAGE 8] 2.7. Regardless of Initial Size, Anthrobots Degrade at a Steady
Rate, Resulting in Large Bots Living Longer

Anthrobots begin to degrade as they age, shrinking in size and
losing displacement ability.[3] To better characterize Anthrobot
aging and degradation, we next investigated whether this pro-
cess unfolds through a single behavioral pattern or whether there
are different paths for Anthrobots to degrade. We collected time-
lapse microscopy images from 36 Anthrobots during the first 35
days upon their dissolution from Matrigel with the goal of char-
acterizing their degradation rate. We analyzed these time course
data (Figure 6A) through a PCA analysis composed of 8 major
metrics: Initial area (area of bot in 1st frame), fin area (area of
bot in final trackable frame), change in area (difference between
fin area and initial area), percent change (change in area/initial
area × 100), standard deviation of difference in areas (SD of
change in area between successive frames), mean of difference
in areas (mean of change in area between successive frames),
time to disintegrate (number of frames until the bot becomes
untrackable), and changerate (the maximum difference in the
difference of areas, akin to the second derivative for the area).
When this 3D data cloud was clustered using the WardD2 un-
supervised clustering algorithm, we observed two statistically or-
thogonal (Figure 6B) groups, revealing a positive correlation be-
tween bots' initial morphology and their life span. Regardless of
initial morphology, all Anthrobots are subject to a similar rate of
degradation, resulting in large bots living longer than smaller An-
throbots (Figure 6C). This reveals that Anthrobot initial morphol-
ogy has a significant impact on Anthrobot longevity, as opposed
to there being a definite life span across the entire population.

[PAGE 8] 3. Discussion

Here, we focused on investigating the morphological, behavioral,
and transcriptomic life stages of Anthrobots. We started by exam-
ining the self-construction process of Anthrobots: as they mature,
Anthrobots undergo eversion, bringing the cilia into an outward-
facing orientation. We found three distinct paths by which An-
throbots can self-construct when embedded in Matrigel, illus-
trating a degree of variability/individuality in their morphogene-
sis. We also found that Anthrobots can recover their functional
form after drastic mechanical injury (consistent with data in
spheroids made from neonatal keratinocytes[30]). The fact that
they self-repair is likely an emergent feature of generic epithe-
lial dynamics, [31] because Anthrobots were never part of an evo-
lutionary process in which ability to repair themselves was se-
lected for, which impacts our understanding of the evolution
of traits such as regeneration. [32] This self-repair process could
make them a useful model for screening healing interventions or
investigating the differences in self-repair from cells of donors of
different ages. [33] Moreover, it has relevance to studies of mecha-
nisms of epithelial closure, [34] and also bodes well for the use of
such biobots in vitro or in bioengineering settings, as they would
not only be somewhat robust to damage from their environment,
but could also positively affect nearby tissues via any secreted
molecules that promote their own healing (as shown previously
in their effects on neural scratch wounds[3]).

[PAGE 9] A key question in evolutionary developmental biology con-
cerns the relationship between the molecular-genetic and
morphobehavioral information, and possible bidirectional con-
trol loops between them. Given that gene expression is under
strong selection forces by a history in a specific environment,
what would the transcriptome of a motile, self-assembling novel
living construct look like? We explored the genes expressed
by Anthrobots and compared them to those of their parent
tissue (airway epithelium) or human embryos to understand the
plasticity of cell groups in the absence of genomic editing. We
found that Anthrobots exhibit a much-altered transcriptome and
display embryonic markers, especially genes involved in axial
patterning (consistent with other studies in the field, including
nonhuman and salivary gland models[35]). Future studies using
spatial transcriptomics will be needed to determine whether
cryptic tissue-level polarity or other kinds of biochemical pat-
terning exist in the Anthrobots. More broadly, numerous kinds
of synthetic constructs, such as more conventional scaffold-
based biobots, [1i-1,12g,36] should be examined via mRNA- and
protein-level omics approaches to look for novel gene expression

[PAGE 9] 
molecules that promote their own healing (as shown previously
in their effects on neural scratch wounds[3]).
A key question in evolutionary developmental biology con-
cerns the relationship between the molecular-genetic and
morphobehavioral information, and possible bidirectional con-
trol loops between them. Given that gene expression is under
strong selection forces by a history in a specific environment,
what would the transcriptome of a motile, self-assembling novel
living construct look like? We explored the genes expressed
by Anthrobots and compared them to those of their parent
tissue (airway epithelium) or human embryos to understand the
plasticity of cell groups in the absence of genomic editing. We
found that Anthrobots exhibit a much-altered transcriptome and
display embryonic markers, especially genes involved in axial
patterning (consistent with other studies in the field, including
nonhuman and salivary gland models[35]). Future studies using
spatial transcriptomics will be needed to determine whether
cryptic tissue-level polarity or other kinds of biochemical pat-
terning exist in the Anthrobots. More broadly, numerous kinds
of synthetic constructs, such as more conventional scaffold-
based biobots, [1i-1,12g,36] should be examined via mRNA- and
protein-level omics approaches to look for novel gene expression

[PAGE 12] 
profiles induced by morphological configuration and behavior
alone.
To understand the life cycle of this novel synthetic construct,
we collected weekly motility data and behavioral profiles of aging
Anthrobots; they displayed robust behavioral longevity, remain-
ing motile until the very end of their lifespan, at which point they
degrade by spontaneously dissociating. We investigated the aging
and degradation of Anthrobots, finding that regardless of their
initial size, Anthrobots degrade at a steady rate, resulting in larger
bots living longer. Information on their end of life is important
for potential in vivo uses of Anthrobots in patients for proregener-
ative applications. [37] We also believe in vitro Anthrobots provide
an attractive platform for screening antiaging candidate interven-
tions, because they can be made patient-specific, and because un-
like traditional cell culture and organoid models, they offer motil-
ity, which can be used to quantify effects of putative prolongevity
reagents not only on anatomical and molecular markers, but on
active behavior. Ongoing studies will characterize that behavior
with respect to ability to follow gradients (preferences) and abil-
ity to learn in simple assays. [15a,38]
The Anthrobots have a somewhat unique life history because
the age of their cells does not match the age of their anatom-
ical structure: they are made of adult (even elderly) cells, but
their life as a multicellular creature begins anew. Anthrobots
and similar systems stand to impact the field of longevity, [39] as
they reveal scenarios beyond the meiosis of embryogenesis that
provide the reset needed to reverse aging. [40] Thus, we sought
to understand what impact their new morphogenetic configu-
ration might have on cell-level markers of aging, via an epige-
netic clock approach;[41] molecular clocks (and especially epige-
netic clocks) have proven to be a valuable window on the aging
process. [41,42] We found that fully assembled and motile multicel-
lular Anthrobots are younger than their cells of origin. This is no-
table because it did not require any of the expected rejuvenation
treatment and occurred in the absence of up-regulation (forced or
natural) of the Yamanaka reprogramming factors. What might
have caused it? A similar event has been found in embryos, [43]
and it has been seen that senescence can be reduced by 3D
culture.[44]
Our data with adult-derived cells reveal that reduction of epi-
genetic age may not be an exclusive, programmed feature of em-
bryonic development but could be generically induced by mor-
phogenetic processes. One way to think about this is from the
perspective of the cells as information-processing agents which
integrate signals from their internal and external environment.
On the one hand, these cells had molecular components consis-
tent with decades of adult life. On the other hand, all their current
evidence - transcription of embryonic axial patterning genes, me-
chanical stresses of morphogenesis, etc., points to being part of
an embryo. In the current protocol, this conflicting information
induces a moderate roll-back of the epigenetic clock (consistent
with data[45] on substrates that can return pluripotent stem cells
to a naïve state). Our data are consistent with psychogenic con-
tributions to aging, [40b] in the sense that the physiological, mor-
phological, and behavioral inputs during self-assembly into a co-
herent 3D structure provide a kind of "age evidencing" that can
propagate to other cellular age endpoints. To enhance this effect,
with possible implications for the field of longevity, we suggest a
research roadmap that exploits recent advances in extending neu-
ral decision-making dynamics to understand cell responses.[46]
Frameworks such as active inference could be used to guide in-
terventions to cell signaling[47] to modify cells' internal model of
their own age.
There were a number of limitations in this study. Still un-
known are metabolic profiles and consequences of this self-
assembly process. Likewise, the factors responsible for the in-
dividuality of the bots (the variety of their behaviors, life span,
etc.) are unknown. With respect to behavior, at this point we do
not know the rules governing their motion, but experiments in
enriched environments with living and nonliving features will
help to probe their behavioral repertoire and thus expand our un-
derstanding of basal cognition (especially in evolutionarily novel
forms), and provide additional endpoints for screening of antiag-
ing and nootropic compounds. Future work will also character-
ize Anthrobots' biomechanical and bioelectrical properties, and
the use of stimuli during their self-construction process to guide
form and function.
Synthetic living constructs made of the patient's own cells have
the potential to impact biomedicine and in vitro organ bioengi-
neering. Especially important is to augment studies of native bi-
ology in organoid models with ones that examine the emergent
motile behaviors and nascent life histories, so that their proper-
ties and competencies can be predicted, exploited, and shaped
toward useful applications. This technology is a positive con-
tribution to active discussions of ethics in bioengineering and
organoid research[48] because they do not need to include brain
tissue, are not derived from embryos, can be made from the pa-
tient's own cells with no heterologous animal material or nano-
material components, and have a limited lifespan. This avoids
some thorny issues that affect other related technologies.
By characterizing new ways in which adult somatic cells can
reboot their multicellularity, and understanding the way these
wild-type cells navigate transcriptional, morphological, and be-
havioral spaces, novel aspects of the cell-body relationship are
revealed. Novel transcriptomic profiles, driven by configurations
and lifestyle, as well as behaviors not exhibited in the standard
species-specific morphological trajectory, have implications for
basic evolutionary, cell, and developmental biology and the ap-
pearance of novelty and evolvability.[49]

[PAGE 12] 
4. Experimental Section

21983844, 0, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/advs.202409330, Wiley Online Library on [02/08/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
[PAGE 13] ADVANCED SCIENCE NEWS
www.advancedsciencenews.com
15 min at 12 000 g and 4 °C. After centrifugation, the aqueous phase con-
taining the RNA was transferred to a new tube. 0.5 mL of isopropanol was
added to the aqueous phase and incubated at room temperature for 10
min. After incubation, the sample was centrifuged for 10 min at 12 000 g
and 4 °C. The RNA formed a small, white pellet on the bottom of the tube.
Next, the supernatant was discarded, being careful not to disturb the RNA
pellet. The pellet was then resuspended in 75% ethanol, vortexed briefly,
and centrifuged again for 5 min at 7500 g and 4 °C. The supernatant was
then discarded, and the pellet was left to dry for between 5 and 10 min.
After drying, 50 µL of RNAse-free water was added to the pellet, and the
sample was incubated on a heat block at 55 °C for 10 min. Finally, the RNA
concentration in the sample was measured using a NanoDrop One from
Thermo Fisher Scientific.
rRNA Depletion RNA-Sequencing: RNA quality was assessed via bio-
analyzer at the Tufts Genomic Core, and Illumina Stranded Total RNA with
Ribo-Zero Plus was used for library preparation with high-quality RNA.
Upon library multiplexing, on Illumina HiSeq 2500, an rRNA depletion run
using reversely stranded, single-end sequencing was performed.
Next-Generation Sequencing (NGS) and Pathway Analysis: Reads were
trimmed for adapter "GATCGGAAGAGCACACGTCTGAACTCCAGTCAC"
and polyX tails, then filtered by sequencing Phred quality (≥Q15) using
fastp.[50] A count table was generated by aligning reads to the human tran-
scriptome (Ensembl version 110) using kallisto [51] and converting tran-
script counts to gene counts using tximport.[52] To filter out low express-
ing genes, genes that had counts per million (CPM) more than 0.29 in at
least 3 samples were kept. This CPM threshold was used so that genes
that were expected to have at least 10 counts were kept, which was a rule-
of-thumb value. There were 22 518 genes after filtering. Counts were then
normalized by weighted trimmed mean of M-values (TMM).[53] If no nor-
malization was needed, all the normalization factors would be 1. Here,
the normalization factors were between 0.84 and 1.26. To use linear mod-
els in the following analysis, Voom transformation[54] was performed to
transform counts into logCPM, where logCPM = log2(106 × count/ (library
size X normalization factor)). Voom transformation estimated the mean-
variance relationship and used it to compute appropriate observation-level
weights so that more read depth gave more weights. To get an overall view
of the similarity and/or difference of the samples, PCA was performed.
Phylostratigraphic Analysis of the DEGs: In order to achieve the phy-
lostratigraphic analysis of the DEGs of the anthrobots in the different con-
ditions, the evolutionary ages of all of the 19 660 protein-coding human
genes were first extracted from Litman et al. [55] Litman et al. assigned
these ages to 1 of the 19 major phylostrata defined by Domazet-Loso and
Tautz. [56] These phylostrata were the following: all living organisms, (Eu-
bacteria, bacteria, and their descendants), Eukaryota, Opisthokonta, Holo-
zoa, Metazoa, Eumetazoa, Bilateria, Deuterostomia, Chordata, Olfactores,
Craniata, Euteleostomi, Tetrapoda, Amniota, Mammalia, Eutheria, Bore-
oeutheria, Euarchontoglires, and Primates. The first two were selected to as-
sess how much the anthrobots were behaving like unicellular organisms
in terms of genetic expression and the number of genes expressed in the
different conditions was counted.
Comparison with Morula Genes: The list of morula genes was extracted
from Yan et al. [57] To do so, the genetic expression of each cell was aver-
aged at the morula stage and only the genes with Reads Per Kilobase per
Million mapped reads (RPKM) > 2 were kept. The overlap between the
DEGs in the different conditions was computed with this list of morula
genes. Then, the overlapped list of genes was enriched using g: Profiler [58]
(see also Supplement S4 in the Supporting Information).
Imaging for Polarity Reversal Experiment: The imaging for the polarity
reversal was done using Anthrobots recently dissolved from their Matrigel
suspension in order to capture their inversion from apical-in to apical-out.
The setup used involved a Bioscience Tools Stage Incubation system con-
sisting of a CO2 Mixer (CO2-MI), a top and bottom stage incubator (TC-
MWPHB), a temperature controller (TC-1-100i), and a humidifier (CO₂-
500 mL). This was set up on an EVOS FL Auto microscope (AMAFD1000)
used for all the imaging. After the imaging setup, the Anthrobots were re-
moved from their Matrigel suspension following the protocol in the orig-
inal Anthrobots paper (Motile Living Biobots Self-Construct from Adult
Human Somatic Progenitor Seed Cells). 200 µL of bronchial epithelial dif-
[PAGE 14] ADVANCED SCIENCE
Open Access
www.advancedscience.com
ferentiation media (BEDM) was added to the inner wells of a 96-well ul-
tralow attachment round-bottom plate from Corning (Cat no. 7007). The
outer wells were filled with sterile DiH₂O, which were found critical to pre-
vent evaporation in the stage incubation setup. Once the plate was filled
with media, the bots were moved to individual wells in a 96-well ultralow
attachment round-bottom plate from Corning (Cat no. 7007). With one bot
per well, the plate was placed into the stage incubation setup. The wells
were imaged at 10x every hour for 72 h.
PCA Clustering of Polarity Reversal Time Course: To find if any patterns
in the behavior of bots during the polarity reversal stage could be compu-
tationally identified, Fiji was used to track the change in position of the bot
for each frame using the AnalyzeParticles tool. After getting a coordinate
analysis of each of the bots, a few variables were generated from the data.
Initially, to determine the trajectory of the bot, the linear distance, speed,
heading, and angular speed were estimated at each position to predict
the coordinates of the following position. Of these variables, the mean,
median, and standard deviation of the angular speed, linear distance, and
linear speed were taken over the entire trajectory of the bot to try to ascer-
tain its behavior over its entire trajectory. These 14 variables were part of
the variables used to make the PCA. Two metrics were then derived to de-
scribe each trajectory: i) a "straightness" index computed as 1 minus the
circular variance of the headings during the block (a value of 1 indicated
a perfectly straight line) and ii) a "gyration" index computed as 1 minus
the circular variance of the angular speed during the block divided by the
circular variance of the same angular speeds and their additive inverse,
which helped in taking into account the magnitude of the angular speeds
themselves (a value of 1 indicated a trajectory following a perfect circle).
These 14 variables were then used in a PCA, which had ≈63% variation in
the first two components. Hierarchical clustering was then employed with
the WardD2 method to derive two clusters.
DNA Extraction: DNA was extracted from Anthrobots and NHBE cells
using a QIAGEN DNeasy Blood and Tissue Kit with its protocol as a
reference. All buffers and mixtures were provided by the kit, saved for
phosphate-buffered saline (PBS). For the NHBEs, the only additional step
was to trypsinize the cell layer with 0.05% Trypsin for 3-4 min until the
cells had been suspended in their media. Once the material (Anthrobots
and NHBEs) was in suspension, it was collected into 15 mL conical tubes
and centrifuged at 300 g for 3 min. The supernatant was then removed,
and the material was resuspended in 200 µL of PBS. Then, 20 µL of Pro-
teinase K was added to the material in suspension. Next, 200 µL of AL
Buffer was added to the suspension and was mixed by vortexing. Next,
200 µL of 95-100% ethanol was added to the suspension, and the solution
was again mixed by vortexing. The mixture was then pipetted into a spin
column placed inside a 2 mL collection tube and centrifuged at 6000 g for
1 min. Then, after discarding the flow-through, 500 µL of Buffer AW1 was
added, and the column was centrifuged again at 6000 g for 1 min. Then,
the flow-through was discarded, and 500 µL of Buffer AW2 was added to
the column. The column was then centrifuged for 3 min at 20 000 g; this
centrifugation was repeated to dry the column. After the dry spin, the col-
umn was placed in a fresh 1.7 mL tube, and 200 µL of AE Buffer was added.
It was let to sit for 1 min before centrifuging for a final time at 6000 g for
1 min. Afterward, the yield of the DNA collected in the 1.7 mL tube was
measured using a NanoDrop One from Thermo Fisher and stored at 4 °C
until needed for downstream applications.
DNA Methylation Age Analysis: The DNA methylation array assays
were performed using the following individual components. First was
bisulfite conversion of extracted DNA using a Zymo EZ DNA methylation
kit for downstream processing by either DNA methylation array technol-
ogy. This was followed by MethylationEPIC BeadChip array kits, which in-
cluded all the reagents required for DNA amplification, labeling, and array.
The third step was to scan completed Beadchip arrays for the final DNA
methylation readout. Finally, there was statistical analysis of measures of
epigenetic aging for the respective species tested, an analysis of treatment
versus control conditions, and an analysis of any available metadata for
associations with changes to epigenetic aging. See Supplement S5 in the
Supporting Information for additional details.
Damage Experiment: Anthrobots were grown according to the previ-
ously established protocol[1] and were transferred between days 2 and
[PAGE 15] ADVANCED SCIENCE NEWS
www.advancedsciencenews.com
11 into BEDM containing wells of a 96-well ultralow attachment round-
bottom plate from Corning (Cat no 7007). The outer wells were filled with
sterile DiH₂O, which were found critical to prevent evaporation in the
stage incubation setup. Next, bots were damaged with a hypodermic nee-
dle and upon withdrawing the needle, they were imaged immediately ev-
ery 2 s for 10-20 min at 10x magnification using a Zeiss Axio Observer,
equipped with an Axiocam 506 mono camera. The following longer term
time-lapses were acquired within a Bioscience Tools Stage Incubation sys-
tem, consisting of a CO2 Mixer (CO2-MI), a top and bottom stage incuba-
tor (TC-MWPHB), a temperature controller (TC-1-100i), and a humidifier
(CO2-500 mL), using an EVOS FL Auto microscope (AMAFD1000). The
wells were imaged at 10x every 30 min for between 48 and 72 h.
Imaging for Degradation: The Anthrobots were imaged for their degra-
dation in the following manner. First, the Anthrobots were dissolved
from their Matrigel suspension according to the previously established
protocol, [3] then each well of a 96-well ultralow attachment round-bottom
plate from Corning (Cat no. 7007) was filled with 200 µL of BEDM with
Retinoic acid. After adding the media, Anthrobots were added individually
to each well, resulting in 1 bot per well. The bots were imaged every 3-4
days at 20x in Brightfield using a Zeiss Axio Observer.Z1, equipped with
an Axiocam 506 mono camera until they disintegrated to the point where
no spheroid structure was visible. Media changes were performed every 4
days by aspirating 100 µL of media from each well and then adding 100 µL
of fresh BEDM with Retinoic acid.
[PAGE 14] Statistical Analysis: For all analyses, the Rstudio computational/
statistical software was used.
Statistical Analysis-Quantification of Anthrobot Growth Modalities: To
computationally identify any patterns in the assembling of bots, Fiji was
used to track the change in the size of the "bot area" for each frame us-
ing the Analyze Particles tool. 
[PAGE 17] Supporting Information
Supporting Information is available from the Wiley Online Library or from
the author.

[60] A. Subramanian, P. Tamayo, V. K. Mootha, S. Mukherjee, B. L. Ebert,
M. A. Gillette, A. Paulovich, S. L. Pomeroy, T. R. Golub, E. S. Lander,
J. P. Mesirov, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2005, 102, 15545.
[61] Y. Benjamini, Y. Hochberg, J. R. Stat. Soc.: Ser. B Stat. Methodol. 1995,
57, 289.
[62] P. Jaccard, New Phytol. 1912, 11, 37.
[63] V. D. Blondel, J.-L. Guillaume, R. Lambiotte, E. Lefebvre, J. Stat. Mech.:
Theory Exp. 2008, P10008.
[64] a) M. Milacic, D. Beavers, P. Conley, C. Gong, M. Gillespie, J. Griss,
R. Haw, B. Jassal, L. Matthews, B. May, R. Petryszak, E. Ragueneau,
K. Rothfels, C. Sevilla, V. Shamovsky, R. Stephan, K. Tiwari, T. Varusai,
J. Weiser, A. Wright, G. Wu, L. Stein, H. Hermjakob, P. D'Eustachio,
Nucleic Acids Res. 2024, 52, D672; b) G. Yu, Q. Y. He, Mol. BioSyst.
2016, 12, 477.
[65] I. Yevshin, R. Sharipov, S. Kolmykov, Y. Kondrakhin, F. Kolpakov, Nu-
cleic Acids Res. 2019, 47, D100.