Planarian Regeneration as a Model of Anatomical Homeostasis:
Recent Progress in Biophysical and Computational Approaches
Michael Levin 1,2,*, Alexis M. Pietak¹, and Johanna Bischof 1,2
1Allen Discovery Center, Tufts University, Medford, MA 02155
2Biology Department and Tufts University, Medford, MA 02155

Abstract
Planarian behavior, physiology, and pattern control offer profound lessons for regenerative
medicine, evolutionary biology, morphogenetic engineering, robotics, and unconventional
computation. Despite recent advances in the molecular genetics of stem cell differentiation, this
model organism's remarkable anatomical homeostasis provokes us with truly fundamental puzzles
about the origin of large-scale shape and its relationship to the genome. In this review article, we
first highlight several deep mysteries about planarian regeneration in the context of the current
paradigm in this field. We then review recent progress in understanding of the physiological
control of an endogenous, bioelectric pattern memory that guides regeneration, and how
modulating this memory can permanently alter the flatworm's target morphology. Finally, we
focus on computational approaches that complement reductive pathway analysis with synthetic,
systems-level understanding of morphological decision-making. We analyze existing models of
planarian pattern control and highlighting recent successes and remaining knowledge gaps in this
interdisciplinary frontier field.


[PAGE 2] Keywords
planaria; Dugesia japonica; regeneration; patterning; morphostasis

[PAGE 2] 1. Introduction
1.1 A primer on planarians' functional features
Planarian flatworms are free-living bilaterian organisms with a complex set of organ systems
and cell types [1, 2]. Planaria possess rich behavioral repertoires that include sensing of a
wide range of environmental cues ranging from chemicals [3] to gravity [4], to weak gamma
radiation [5]. Though planaria have a true brain [6, 7], the real wonder of this remarkable
model system is revealed most clearly when one considers the robust decision-making
capabilities of its individual somatic pieces [8]. Amputated fragments of planaria regenerate
a complete worm, growing precisely what is missing – no more and no less – with events at
the wound edge coordinated tightly with body-wide remodeling of the intact tissue to ensure
that a perfectly proportioned animal results within about a week after it is cut along any
plane [9]. Every piece of a planarian is able to grow and remodel towards its species-specific
large-scale pattern, stopping precisely when that specific anatomical pattern (the target
morphology) is achieved. This is most obvious in the head-tail polarity of their primary axis:
like a bar magnet cut into pieces (Fig. 1A), each piece determines head/tail identity at the
wound based on an invariant axial polarity, regenerating into a worm with one head and one
tail.

Planarians' unparalleled pattern homeostasis – the ability to adjust cellular activity to a
large-scale anatomical specification [10, 11] – is an on-going process, not an injury-specific
one. Starving animals will shrink, and well-fed animals will grow, repeating this process ad
infinitum while maintaining correct body proportions [12]. Because of this capability,
planaria have conquered aging. While single cells senesce and die within relatively short
time spans (~1 month) [13–18], the animal regenerates tissues continuously; planaria like D.
japonica appear to be immortal at the level of the individual. Planaria are the champions of
life-long functional health and damage repair. However, unlike simpler forms of life such as
bacteria or Hydra, planaria combine these abilities with significant cognitive potential – they
can learn in instrumental and classical conditioning contexts [19–24]. In keeping with their
incredible somatic plasticity, they can transfer information between the body and the brain
[25-28], and reprogram cancerous tissue when regeneration is activated [29, 30].

Planaria serve as a proof-of-principle – showing what is possible for biological systems to
achieve. Therefore, truly understanding planaria would crack open most of the pressing
problems in the fields of aging, regenerative medicine, cancer, and primitive cognition.
Beyond biology, they also serve as a design challenge for fields such as morphogenetic
engineering [31, 32], unconventional computation [33–35], and soft robotics [36, 37], which
look to the biological world for clues as to designing robust, parallel, fault-tolerant systems.
The planarian's ability to integrate patterning and functional control is a superb example of
morphological computation [38] and distributed decision-making [39, 40]. The dynamic
adaptability of planaria dwarfs engineers' efforts on this front – no human artifacts even
come close to their capabilities yet.

[PAGE 3] 1.2 Fundamental knowledge gaps
"No paradox, no progress."
- Niels Bohr

As befits a model system with fundamental lessons to teach, planaria starkly reveal the large
gaps in current knowledge. While much excellent work has drilled deeply into the molecular
genetics of stem cell regulation [41, 42] and specific pathways necessary for regeneration
[43, 44], we are still largely missing an understanding of the dynamics that are sufficient to
build an organism with the observed remodeling and repair functions. Here, we argue that
some of the most fascinating aspects of this field concern not only the mechanisms involved
at the cellular and molecular levels, but also the algorithms that harness individual cell
behaviors toward specific large-scale anatomical outcomes. We begin by highlighting a few
of the mysteries that still confront us despite the recent advances in planarian molecular
biology.

Establishing correct anterior-posterior (AP) polarity involves making sure every fragment
cut from a planarian ends up with exactly one head and one tail, at the appropriate locations
(setting aside for now the issue of orienting and scaling them correctly, giving them the right
shape, and stopping when they are done). Planaria axially pattern each fragment no matter
where it came from in the parent structure (Fig. 1A') – the challenging nature of this process
becomes clear when one considers a single bisected worm (Fig. 1A"). One wound site will
make a head while the other will make a tail; the cells in those two wound sites were
adjacent neighbors (before an arbitrary cut separated them) and yet go on to make radically
different anatomical structures. A fundamental challenge is to understand the decision-
making process that occurs at each wound site – what are the cells measuring, and from how
far away, to determine anatomical identity of the new tissue to be made? This is difficult for
simple gradient models to explain (as the wound cells had identical positional information
before the cut, Fig. 1A", green circles); head-inhibits-head models of this phenomenon run
afoul of the fact that a brain has no trouble building another brain right next to it, if the head
is amputated longitudinally, as well as being unable to explain axial patterning in mid-
fragments with open wounds on both sides.

The second puzzle concerns the conspicuous lack of stable lines of planarian patterning
mutants. Most other model organisms – Drosophila, C. elegans, chick, mouse, zebrafish, and
humans - all offer stably transmitted lines with characteristic and striking anatomical
deviations from wild-type (patterning mutants) that can be studied to forge a link between
genetics and anatomy (central to understanding the genotype-phenotype relationship in
evolution). It is rarely mentioned in our field that, despite almost 120 years of every
conceivable experiment including irradiation, with the exception of a physiologically-
induced double-headed line described below, there are no planarian mutant lines with
patterns (in shape, number, or placement of specific organs) that differ from the standard
species-specific target morphology. Why?


[PAGE 4] The answer might be linked to the third puzzle: their remarkable anatomical stability in the
face of a highly variable genome. Weissmann's Barrier (Fig. 1B,B') does not apply to
species like D. japonica which reproduce primarily asexually by fission and regeneration. In
this case, any mutation that does not kill a neoblast is propagated to the next generation and
can expand into a clonal line (Fig. 1B",B"). This will be especially true of the inevitable
dominant mutations, which increase relative cellular fitness and could become something
akin to cancer stem cells. This somatic inheritance (Fig. 1C–C") is predicted to generate
extremely divergent genomes over time [45]; indeed not only are some planarian species
mixoploid (not every cell has the same chromosome number) [46], but they also accumulate
immense amount of change: up to 74% in protein-coding genes [47]. Indeed, large numbers
of mutations have been found both outside and within gene-coding regions, including many
amino acid substitutions and non-synonymous SNPs. Furthermore, an analysis of the
genome of the planaria Schmidtea mediterranea revealed that many essential genes are
missing from the genome, including components of many core pathways ranging from cell
division, to DNA repair and metabolism [48]. And yet, they regenerate under control
conditions with 100% anatomical fidelity, making perfect planaria each time despite their
messy genomes. How is it possible for the genome to accumulate somatic mutations over
hundreds of millions of years and yet maintain perfect anatomical fidelity? This paradox is
pointing to a fundamental lack of knowledge of “where pattern comes from” and what part
genetics plays in the answer. We are currently investigating this issue by raising generations
of planaria in heavy doses of mutagens, to fully probe the stability of their pattern
homeostasis under genetic change.

The fourth puzzle to consider is a thought experiment. Suppose a hybrid was made between
planaria with two distinct head shapes: removing half of the neoblasts of one species of
planaria, and populating it with 50% of the neoblasts from another species (Fig. 1D). After
the neoblasts get a chance to accustom to their new home, the head is amputated (Fig. 1D',D
"). As the neoblasts start rebuilding the head, what shape will form (Fig. 1D")? Is one
dominant over the other, or will it be an intermediate shape, or will the remodeling never
cease, as each set of neoblasts is never given the "stop" signal derived from having a
complete, normally-shaped head appropriate to its species? The value of this
Gedankenexperiment is not so much only in the answer, but in the fact that we currently
have no models that make a prediction about this basic scenario. The combined
communities' best quantitative models, including extensive RNAseq profiling, do not
constrain the outcome of such experiments – they are silent about shape and what
determines it, and it is not yet clear how much of the necessary information is generated by
the soma and how much by the neoblasts. Thus, our field lacks theoretical frameworks for
thinking about large-scale states (e.g., head shape) as targets and stop conditions for pattern
homeostasis loops regulating cell behavior. This is a necessity if we are to understand how
cells know what to build and when to stop.


[PAGE 4] 1.3 Perspective
We highlight these puzzles as examples of questions that emphasize major knowledge gaps,
and thus opportunities, in this field. We argue that significant new conceptual and
technological approaches must be added to the highly successful mainstream efforts to
understand specific gene products and cell-level phenotypes. Here, we use planarian
regeneration as a lens through which to view several broad issues of biological computation,
pattern control, and the genotype-phenotype relation. Advances in biochemical and genetic
controls of regeneration have been expertly reviewed elsewhere [44, 49–51]. Focusing on
synthesis and understanding global morphological decision-making in this model system, we
review recent developments in this field that have the potential to drive progress on
fundamental aspects of the origin and control of growth and form. These include (1)
endogenous physiological signals that underlie pattern control: bioelectric and
neurotransmitter-mediated signaling mechanisms in numerous cell types, which enable long-
range coordination and morphological decision-making by cell collectives [40]; and (2)
advances in computational modeling and automated model discovery, which are helping to
understand the algorithms by which planarian shape is controlled.

[PAGE 5] 2. Physiological Controls of Patterning
Regeneration of significant injury requires rebuilding structures that are properly
coordinated in position, orientation and size with the large-scale anatomy of the remaining
body, which implies that cells need non-local information to make patterning decisions (Fig.
1A΄). The ability to re-create the same structure time and again can be understood as a
"pattern memory” [39, 52], while the ability to reach the same correct pattern from different
initial starting conditions (location and extent of damage) implies a robust goal-directed
process. One way to think about the remarkable decision-making properties of planarian
tissues is to consider the algorithms and molecular mechanisms exploited by brains - our
best example of biological systems that implement memory, distributed processing,
decision-making, and flexible goal-achieving cell networks. Interestingly, planaria were one
of the earliest model systems in which data suggested roles for ion- and voltage-mediated
processes in guiding regeneration [53–57]. Since then, advances in developmental
bioelectricity (reviewed in [58, 59]) have driven hypotheses about the role of ion channels in
guiding cell behavior, and more broadly, about the relationships between the activity of
multi-cellular electric circuits and developmental morphospace [60, 61]. This perspective
made several specific and counter-intuitive predictions, driving new experiments that
complement the biochemical/genetic research programs. Recent work has tested some of
these predictions, uncovering novel biology in the planarian model system.

[PAGE 5] 2.1 Prediction 1: Ion channels and voltage gradients are involved in planarian patterning
Neurons compute and transmit information long-distance by virtue of electrical signaling. It
is now well-recognized that even neural computations can involve graded (not spiking)
potentials [62-66], which are more similar to the slower, steady non-neural bioelectric
events operating in regeneration and development (Fig. 2A). Could non-neural somatic
tissues be performing information-processing tasks by exploiting ion flows, albeit in
different ways and on different timescales than brains? While developmental biologists are
not yet used to thinking of non-neural tissues making decisions, the emerging field of
primitive cognition [67, 68] and the recent data on the phylogeny of ion channel and
neurotransmitter signals [69–71] have highlighted the fact that brains did not invent their
tricks de novo – the basic machinery of bioelectrical computation (Fig. 2A') was present

Levin et al.
Page 5
understand specific gene products and cell-level phenotypes. Here, we use planarian
regeneration as a lens through which to view several broad issues of biological computation,
pattern control, and the genotype-phenotype relation. Advances in biochemical and genetic
controls of regeneration have been expertly reviewed elsewhere [44, 49–51]. Focusing on
synthesis and understanding global morphological decision-making in this model system, we
review recent developments in this field that have the potential to drive progress on
fundamental aspects of the origin and control of growth and form. These include (1)
endogenous physiological signals that underlie pattern control: bioelectric and
neurotransmitter-mediated signaling mechanisms in numerous cell types, which enable long-
range coordination and morphological decision-making by cell collectives [40]; and (2)
advances in computational modeling and automated model discovery, which are helping to
understand the algorithms by which planarian shape is controlled.

[PAGE 5] 2. Physiological Controls of Patterning
Regeneration of significant injury requires rebuilding structures that are properly
coordinated in position, orientation and size with the large-scale anatomy of the remaining
body, which implies that cells need non-local information to make patterning decisions (Fig.
1A΄). The ability to re-create the same structure time and again can be understood as a
"pattern memory” [39, 52], while the ability to reach the same correct pattern from different
initial starting conditions (location and extent of damage) implies a robust goal-directed
process. One way to think about the remarkable decision-making properties of planarian
tissues is to consider the algorithms and molecular mechanisms exploited by brains – our
best example of biological systems that implement memory, distributed processing,
decision-making, and flexible goal-achieving cell networks. Interestingly, planaria were one
of the earliest model systems in which data suggested roles for ion- and voltage-mediated
processes in guiding regeneration [53–57]. Since then, advances in developmental
bioelectricity (reviewed in [58, 59]) have driven hypotheses about the role of ion channels in
guiding cell behavior, and more broadly, about the relationships between the activity of
multi-cellular electric circuits and developmental morphospace [60, 61]. This perspective
made several specific and counter-intuitive predictions, driving new experiments that
complement the biochemical/genetic research programs. Recent work has tested some of
these predictions, uncovering novel biology in the planarian model system.

[PAGE 5] 2.1 Prediction 1: Ion channels and voltage gradients are involved in planarian patterning
Neurons compute and transmit information long-distance by virtue of electrical signaling. It
is now well-recognized that even neural computations can involve graded (not spiking)
potentials [62-66], which are more similar to the slower, steady non-neural bioelectric
events operating in regeneration and development (Fig. 2A). Could non-neural somatic
tissues be performing information-processing tasks by exploiting ion flows, albeit in
different ways and on different timescales than brains? While developmental biologists are
not yet used to thinking of non-neural tissues making decisions, the emerging field of
primitive cognition [67, 68] and the recent data on the phylogeny of ion channel and
neurotransmitter signals [69–71] have highlighted the fact that brains did not invent their
tricks de novo – the basic machinery of bioelectrical computation (Fig. 2A') was present
very early on in evolution and is ubiquitous in animal, plant, and fungal bodies. Even before
multicellularity, cells were using ion channels and neurotransmitters to process information
and communicate; from bacteria, fungi, to the earliest metazoans, cells exploited ion
currents to regulate individual and group behaviors (data in vertebrate as well as invertebrate
systems are reviewed in [59, 72–74]).

Page 6
Research into bioelectric aspects of patterning has a rich classical history [75, 76]. The ideal
fit of bioelectric circuits to the control of regeneration did not escape prescient early workers
such as T. H. Morgan, who postulated electrical polarity to underlie regenerative axial
polarity [77, 78], and C. M. Child, who focused on physiological gradients in pattern control
[79]. Subsequent work used applied electric fields and biochemical analysis to manipulate
planarian head/tail polarity [55, 56, 80, 81] and suggested the electrophoretic movement of
morphogens during this process [82, 83] – a scheme that applies also to vertebrate left-right
axial patterning [84].

Recent work (summarized in Tables 1–3) has moved beyond applied electric fields to probe
the regenerative involvement of proteins and signaling molecules most often associated with
the nervous system. Bioelectric signals (both slow and rapid) occur among all cell types, not
just neurons, and are driven by several main classes of components (Fig. 2B): a) ion channel
and pump proteins that set resting potential (Vmem), b) gap junction proteins (such as
Connexins or Innexins) which form cytosolic connections to share a cell's electrical and
chemical state with neighboring cells, c) neurotransmitters and other small signaling
molecules that move (by electrophoresis or voltage-powered transporters) across cell groups,
and d) transduction machinery that converts changes in resting potential to downstream
processes such as transcriptional changes (see [58] for review). Advances in imaging
endogenous anatomical gradients of resting potential across tissues in vivo [85–87], and the
development of techniques for specific modification of endogenous bioelectric aspects of
morphogenesis [88, 89] have uncovered roles for bioelectric prepatterns (Fig. 2B') in
morphogenesis across phyla, from the alignment of the left-right axis [90] (sea urchin, frog,
chick), control of developing organ size and shape [91–93] (Drosophila, frog, and zebrafish),
induction of appendage regeneration [94] (frog), and craniofacial patterning [95, 96] (frog,
mouse, and human).

Bioelectric pathways are most efficiently probed by misexpressing dominant channels,
including optogenetic actuators [95, 97–99]; however, the expression of exogenous DNA is
not yet possible in planaria (it is not yet known if this is related to the lack of genetic mutant
lines in planaria). Instead, loss-of-function via RNAi or small molecule inhibitors (which
also offer the benefit of mass spectrometry-verified wash-out experiments) can be used to
make predictable changes in resting potential patterns and downstream outcomes. Targeting
native bioelectric components in planaria has revealed a dependence of the head-tail decision
on voltage gradients driven by the H+/K+-ATPase [100]; alteration of the normal bioelectric
gradient in regenerative fragments [100] (using RNAi or drug inhibitors) can produce
double-head or no-head heteromorphoses (Fig. 3A-A") in D. japonica. Similar work in S.
mediterranea identified a role for bioelectric signaling in size control and rescaling of the
head [101], a function that appears conserved in brain [91], eye [102], and tail [92]. In
addition to proteins that generate electrical gradients, gap junctions (a.k.a. electrical

Page 7
synapses) are crucial to the function of networks because they are highly controllable valves
[103], which cells can use to regulate the spatial propagation of electrochemical signaling
through tissues [104]. It is thus no surprise that both RNAi-based and pharmacological
targeting of innexin-based gap junctions revealed roles in the control of stem cell dynamics
[105] and head/tail polarity [106].

[PAGE 7] 2.2 Prediction 2: Neurotransmitters are involved in planarian patterning control
A key component to the function of neural circuits are neurotransmitters – small signaling
molecules that move as a result of bioelectric dynamics. These are evolutionarily ancient
[107], long predating the appearance of nervous systems, and are known to be utilized as a
kind of morphogen in development, for example in left-right axial polarity [108, 109] and
early blastomere dynamics [110]. Are neurotransmitters important for planarian regenerative
control [111]? The Marchant lab's elegant use of a combination of pharmacology and
molecular genetics identified important functional roles for serotonin, voltage-gated calcium
channels, and other neurotransmitter machinery in determining anterior-posterior polarity in
planarian regeneration [112–118]. Unlike RNA or protein, neurotransmitters are too small to
effectively tag, hindering efforts to observe their movement through tissues during
regeneration. Recent development of fluorescent sensors of neurotransmitters such as [119,
120] and light-based techniques for precise spatio-temporal control of neurotransmitter
signaling [121, 122] will revolutionize this area, as soon as misexpression of exogenous
proteins is available in planaria.

[PAGE 7] 2.3 Prediction 3: Anatomical outcome and genetic default can diverge
Another feature of bioelectric pathways is that they confer a degree of robustness and
plasticity that enable outcomes diverging from genetic default. For example, in Xenopus,
metastatic melanoma can be initiated on a background of a perfectly normal genome (no
carcinogens, no oncogenic mutagenesis) [123], tumors induced by KRAS mutation can be
normalized [97], and brain defects induced by dominant Notch mutations can be
circumvented [91], all by the appropriate modulation of native bioelectrical communication
among cells.

Large-scale anatomical pattern (the species-specific target morphology) is thought to be
determined by the genomic sequence and its chromatin modifications. Recent data, however,
suggest that bioelectric networks also store key components of this information, as another
epigenetic layer of pattern control [52]. This is consistent with Waddington's original sense
of the word, which included much more than chromatin modifications. G. dorotocephala
planarians regenerate their specific head morphology with 100% fidelity under normal
conditions. However (Fig. 3B,B'), when their heads were amputated, and the fragments
exposed to a reagent that alters the bioelectrical connectivity among the cells [124], they
regenerated heads that closely resembled those of several other species (as confirmed by
quantitative morphometrics). Moreover, it was not only external head shapes that were
converted, but also the shape of the brain and distribution of neoblasts in the head became
similar to that observed in the heads of these other extant species [124].

Page 8
One notable aspect is that the choice of heads was stochastic (Fig. 3C) – the different types
of heads appeared in the same cohort of animals treated identically and raised in the same
dish, but in frequencies proportional to the evolutionary distance between the species they
resembled [124]. These data showed that a wild-type animal exposed briefly to a non-
mutagenic modulator of gap junctions can generate heads belonging to species ~150 million
years distant. This drastic effect of a transient change to bioelectric circuit dynamics,
suggests these as a novel form of epigenetics, and one with convenient master-regulator
properties that could readily have been exploited by evolution (e.g., via mutations in ion
channel coding or promoter regions) as part of the exploration of a morphospace. Another
notable aspect is that the change was not permanent: several weeks after completion of head
construction, remodeling suddenly began, and converted the heads back to a normal G.
dorotocephala shape. Unlike the example of permanent patterning change described below,
this head-shape switch most resembles short-term memory without consolidation. Work is
currently on-going to formulate and test quantitative dynamical systems models which
reveal why head shape changes represent shallower attractor states than head-tail decisions
in the physico-chemical state space of the circuits driving regeneration in planaria (thus,
easier for the system to escape from) [61, 125].

[PAGE 8] 2.4 Prediction 4: Pattern memory can be over-written
The dominant paradigm for regeneration is that of emergence, with cells behaving according
to specific rules, and the combination of a large number of these individual activities
somehow resulting in the same complex body being created from diverse starting conditions.
A complementary view is that a specific pattern memory (the organism's target morphology)
is encoded, at least in very general terms, by some physical mechanism in tissue that is read
out and elaborated during regeneration and regulative embryogenesis (and serves as
reference for the stopping point for new growth and remodeling). Neuroscientists are
comfortable with cellular networks that guide flexible activity to achieve stored goal states.
Could a more ancient version of this system be more widely utilized for pattern control in
biology? One of the major benefits emerging from cybernetics and control theory over the
last six decades is a solid grounding for teleological-seeming processes in rigorous
engineering principles. Systems that implement specific goal states can be modeled as
homeostatic processes that do not require any anthropomorphisms, and are routinely
constructed (from thermostats to self-driving cars). Thus, one way to model regeneration is
as a kind of pattern homeostasis – a TOTE (Test-Operate-Test-Exit) loop [39, 126]. Planaria
tissues can be envisioned as executing a continuous error minimization, striving to reduce
the difference between the current morphology and the species' target morphology (a kind of
least-action model, as is often used to understand the role of other physical forces in
morphogenesis [127–129]). A key aspect of any homeostatic process is that it has to store a
setpoint - planarian tissue would have to represent (encode) some amount of information
about the bodyplan they must regenerate to (and stop when the current anatomy matches this
pattern memory). Thus, one prediction of this highly speculative viewpoint is that it should
be possible to over-write the setpoint and permanently change the shape to which the
animals regenerate in the future.


Page 9
Precisely this was discovered when D. japonica animals were treated with 1-octanol (Fig.
4A) – an experiment motivated by the fact that gap junctions are a key component of
memory in the brain and also an ideal candidate for the long-range communication between
the wound site and remote tissues. The result was double-headed bipolar heteromorphoses
[106], which, remarkably, continued to regenerate as double-headed in perpetuity with no
further treatments (Fig. 4A΄). These animals, which lose all trace of the gap junction-
blocking reagent in a few days after initial treatment, are permanently converted to
regenerating a different target morphology by a transient physiological perturbation. This
phenomenon was first described as “trophic memory” in Bubenik's work on deer antler
injuries and pattern changes in subsequent years of regeneration [130]; planaria provide the
first molecularly-tractable model system in which this fascinating aspect of regeneration
biology can be studied [131]. The permanent double-head state can be re-set back to a wild-
type single-head target morphology by a different transient modulation of the bioelectric
circuit using the ion pump blocker SCH28080 (Fig. 4B).

A biophysical model of the planarian pattern memory has been analyzed [132], explaining
how patterning in regenerates can be templated off of stable biophysical properties of
fragments despite wild-type genomic sequence. While it is very possible that the permanent
change of pattern memory also involves chromatin modification machinery [133], the field
of epigenetics does not yet offer an explanation of how large-scale anatomical patterning
outcomes would result from specific chromatin states in individual cells. At the same time,
the long-range organizing properties of electric fields arising from ion channel activity
provide a natural medium in which to understand these questions of how large-scale order
arises [125, 134–136]. The interaction of bioelectrics and chromatin modification machinery
[137, 138] remains therefore an important area for future work.

As with any intervention (molecular-genetic or pharmacological), the effects of gap junction
inhibiting reagents are not 100% penetrant in a cohort of planaria treated together. However,
an interesting phenomenon was discovered when the unaffected “escapees”, which looked
like normal one-headed planaria, were re-cut weeks after the initial treatment without any
further interventions. It was found [132] that these animals were in fact not wild-type: they
differed from normal planaria in that when cut, in plain water, they generated double-headed
worms in the same proportion as the original treated cohort (Fig. 4B). The same is true for
subsequent generations from these “cryptic” worms. The cryptic worms were analyzed and
shown to have normal anatomy, histology, stem cell distribution, and expression of several
head and tail markers (Fig. 4B΄). What makes these worms, bearing apparently normal
hardware, regenerate in a stochastic manner in plain water? It is that they bear an aberrant
pattern memory: voltage-sensitive fluorescent dyes reveal that their tissues are uniformly
more depolarized than true wild-type worms (Fig. 4Β΄).

Numerous examples in engineering (e.g., flip flops) exist of how the same electrical circuit
can be bi-stable, able to store several discrete possible patterns of gene expression or ion
flow [139]. It is not yet known whether these concepts will directly translate to
understanding planarian pattern control; however, the cryptic worm data described above
provide a simple illustration of how an anatomically-normal body can support distinct
bodyplan encodings that are latent, but recalled if the animal is challenged to regenerate in

Levin et al.
Page 9
Precisely this was discovered when D. japonica animals were treated with 1-octanol (Fig.
4A) an experiment motivated by the fact that gap junctions are a key component of
memory in the brain and also an ideal candidate for the long-range communication between
the wound site and remote tissues. The result was double-headed bipolar heteromorphoses
[106], which, remarkably, continued to regenerate as double-headed in perpetuity with no
further treatments (Fig. 4A΄). These animals, which lose all trace of the gap junction-
blocking reagent in a few days after initial treatment, are permanently converted to
regenerating a different target morphology by a transient physiological perturbation. This
phenomenon was first described as “trophic memory” in Bubenik's work on deer antler
injuries and pattern changes in subsequent years of regeneration [130]; planaria provide the
first molecularly-tractable model system in which this fascinating aspect of regeneration
biology can be studied [131]. The permanent double-head state can be re-set back to a wild-
type single-head target morphology by a different transient modulation of the bioelectric
circuit using the ion pump blocker SCH28080 (Fig. 4B).

A biophysical model of the planarian pattern memory has been analyzed [132], explaining
how patterning in regenerates can be templated off of stable biophysical properties of
fragments despite wild-type genomic sequence. While it is very possible that the permanent
change of pattern memory also involves chromatin modification machinery [133], the field
of epigenetics does not yet offer an explanation of how large-scale anatomical patterning
outcomes would result from specific chromatin states in individual cells. At the same time,
the long-range organizing properties of electric fields arising from ion channel activity
provide a natural medium in which to understand these questions of how large-scale order
arises [125, 134–136]. The interaction of bioelectrics and chromatin modification machinery
[137, 138] remains therefore an important area for future work.

As with any intervention (molecular-genetic or pharmacological), the effects of gap junction
inhibiting reagents are not 100% penetrant in a cohort of planaria treated together. However,
an interesting phenomenon was discovered when the unaffected “escapees”, which looked
like normal one-headed planaria, were re-cut weeks after the initial treatment without any
further interventions. It was found [132] that these animals were in fact not wild-type: they
differed from normal planaria in that when cut, in plain water, they generated double-headed
worms in the same proportion as the original treated cohort (Fig. 4B). The same is true for
subsequent generations from these “cryptic” worms. The cryptic worms were analyzed and
shown to have normal anatomy, histology, stem cell distribution, and expression of several
head and tail markers (Fig. 4B΄). What makes these worms, bearing apparently normal
hardware, regenerate in a stochastic manner in plain water? It is that they bear an aberrant
pattern memory: voltage-sensitive fluorescent dyes reveal that their tissues are uniformly
more depolarized than true wild-type worms (Fig. 4Β΄).

Numerous examples in engineering (e.g., flip flops) exist of how the same electrical circuit
can be bi-stable, able to store several discrete possible patterns of gene expression or ion
flow [139]. It is not yet known whether these concepts will directly translate to
understanding planarian pattern control; however, the cryptic worm data described above
provide a simple illustration of how an anatomically-normal body can support distinct
bodyplan encodings that are latent, but recalled if the animal is challenged to regenerate in

Page 10
the future. In this, they fulfill the basic properties that define memory (whether neural,
electronic, or molecular): encoding discrete large-scale outcomes, which are long-term
stable, and yet sufficiently labile to be able to be rewritten by appropriate stimuli. A
dynamical systems perspective on such discrete, stable, yet potentially labile end-states is to
view them as attractors in the state space of the relevant circuits, which demarcate regions of
morphospace corresponding to different bodyplan layouts (Fig. 4C).

[PAGE 10] 2.5 Summary: Physiological controls of growth and form
The planarian model system offers experimentally-tractable examples of rewriting the
anatomical setpoint for regeneration without genomic editing: permanent changes of the
pattern to which animals regenerate following future injury, driven by transient alterations of
physiological state (Fig. 4A,B-B΄). Currently, our ability to control biological patterns is
limited, and the full range of possible patterns is unknown. Future work must focus on a
better understanding of the interplay of transcriptional, chromatin-based, and physiological
layers to explain stochasticity in large-scale anatomical outcomes and long-term stability of
target morphology. The key challenge is to convert pathway and physiological circuit
information at the level of single cells into an understanding of stable large-scale anatomical
attractor states, and to achieve a systems level understanding of shape homeostasis and
regeneration (Fig. 4A). AP polarity can be explained using chemical positional information
gradients coupled with directed transport [125, 140]; it remains to be seen whether the full
complexity of planarian pattern homeostasis (including shape, cell number and proportion,
and patterning along DV/LR axes) will require connectionist or other neural-like
computational models [40, 141]. Just how much global information is encoded in
physiological circuits, to what resolution a target morphology might be represented in tissue,
the size of the smallest unit that processes bioelectric states (single cells, or cell groups), and
how much predictive control can be gained over patterning in planaria, are open questions
that will require not only technique development but conceptual advances that may need to
borrow from neuroscience, control theory, and cybernetics.

[PAGE 11] 3. Computational Approaches to an Integrative Understanding
The mysteries of planarian regeneration have been with us for ~120 years [142], and one of
the most challenging aspects has been the discovery of specific models that exhibit the
desired patterning properties matching the huge base of functional knowledge in this model
system. As with many difficult problems in science, this field is ripe for assistance from the
revolution in information technology. Alongside new recent databases of transcriptomic,
phylogenetic, and biochemical resources (such as PlanNET and PlanMine) [143, 144], two
new directions are emerging: simulation environments for interrogating the complex
dynamics of patterning models, and machine learning tools for helping to derive models
with desired properties.

[PAGE 11] 3.1 Current state of the art in understanding regenerative dynamics: gradients and beyond
Next, we summarize the current state of the art in computational understanding of planarian
regeneration, focusing primarily on anterior-posterior axial polarity.

Page 11
The mechanisms underlying body-plan control in planaria have been explored from a variety
of different perspectives, from biochemical gradients to neural network dynamics [141, 145,
146]. Models exploring gradients of positional information (mediated by gene expression

Page 12
While reaction-diffusion models are valuable in contextualizing body plan control in
regeneration in terms of an experimentally tractable output, and show promise in explaining
positional information generation and control in planaria, these models suffer from a fatal

Page 13
dynamics that must be implemented to explain regeneration [167]. This is essential to bridge
the well-recognized gulf between the growing deluge of transcriptomic and genomic data
and the anatomical outcomes reported in the functional literature that we seek to understand
and control. Simulation modules for planaria include ones that focus on biochemical
diffusible factors [168], and the BETSE modeling environment [134], in which a very rich
set of dynamics (including biochemical signaling as well as bioelectric/physiological
processes), in a bio-realistic spatialized virtual tissue context, can be explicitly modeled
[125].

The fields of genetics and cell biology have been revolutionized by bioinformatics -
computational tools that help scientists deal with high-volume molecular/genetic data.
Planarian regeneration was the domain of some of the first efforts at a new bioinformatics of
shape - software for extracting control principles of multicellular anatomical control from
functional published data. One aspect of this effort is formalizing results of functional
regenerative experiments and capturing the relationships between interventions and
anatomical outcomes (Fig. 5A–B′). PlanForm formalized both the possible functional
experiments in the planarian model system (including gene targeting, surgical cut/paste
manipulations, etc.), and possible planarian body configurations as outcomes of such
experiments (via graph representations) [169, 170]. The database currently contains most of
the papers in the planarian research field, matching published experiments to their patterning
outcomes. This expert system not only allows new workers in the field to rapidly determine
what has been done and what the outcomes result from specific manipulations, but also
forms the body of knowledge against which models of regeneration can be formally tested,
to determine how well they recapitulate the known dynamics of planarian repair. This
database is a flexible, general knowledge system to which newly published papers' results
can be continuously added resulting in a standardized resource akin to UniProt for molecular
data.

[PAGE 13] 3.3 Tools for model discovery
Environments are coming on-line for quantitative simulations of available models, whose
predictions can be tested against prior data. Anterior-posterior patterning and re-scaling have
been solved by models created in the traditional way [125, 140, 145, 146, 171]. However,
future work will also have to deal with the full range of remarkable capabilities of planarian
regeneration. Arbitrary cuts and punctures require a worm to restore precisely-patterned and
intricate shapes such as intestinal branches, brains, pharynxes, and numerous other tissues/
organ systems in the right number, shape, placement, and orientation (stopping precisely
when the right shape is complete). A bio-realistic model combining molecular genetics and
biophysics to quantitatively explain the full spectrum of planarian regenerative capabilities is
likely to be incredibly complex. Moreover, the rapidly increasing dataset on perturbations
and outcomes in this (and other systems) makes it increasingly more difficult for scientists to
come up with models that exhibit the correct large-scale patterning behavior from a
specification of cellular pathways and include all available results. Thus, it is likely that this
field, as many others, is poised to benefit from machine learning approaches – using
techniques from artificial intelligence to assist human scientists in model discovery (a
branch of the nascent Robot Scientist field [172]).

[PAGE 13] 3.3 Tools for model discovery
Environments are coming on-line for quantitative simulations of available models, whose
predictions can be tested against prior data. Anterior-posterior patterning and re-scaling have
been solved by models created in the traditional way [125, 140, 145, 146, 171]. However,
future work will also have to deal with the full range of remarkable capabilities of planarian
regeneration. Arbitrary cuts and punctures require a worm to restore precisely-patterned and
intricate shapes such as intestinal branches, brains, pharynxes, and numerous other tissues/
organ systems in the right number, shape, placement, and orientation (stopping precisely
when the right shape is complete). A bio-realistic model combining molecular genetics and
biophysics to quantitatively explain the full spectrum of planarian regenerative capabilities is
likely to be incredibly complex. Moreover, the rapidly increasing dataset on perturbations
and outcomes in this (and other systems) makes it increasingly more difficult for scientists to
come up with models that exhibit the correct large-scale patterning behavior from a
specification of cellular pathways and include all available results. Thus, it is likely that this
field, as many others, is poised to benefit from machine learning approaches – using
techniques from artificial intelligence to assist human scientists in model discovery (a
branch of the nascent Robot Scientist field [172]).

[PAGE 14] 
A recent example of model inference from functional data [168] used evolutionary search
algorithms (progressive rounds of evaluation and proportional mutation of candidate models,
Fig. 5C) to rapidly uncover a small biochemical network whose behavior in a biochemical
simulator matched key regeneration experiments on anterior-posterior polarity (Fig. 5D,D').
Surprisingly, this first example of a non-human-derived model in regenerative biology
resulted in a fully-specified model that is simple enough for human scientists to understand
(unlike neural network approaches, the result is not simply a black box that gets the answers
correct but provides limited insight into the dynamics involved) (Fig 5D). The use of
evolutionary principles to identify models with desired functional properties (the process by
which real planaria arose) is a powerful strategy for future work, as the search can be re-run
as new data appear in the database, and more powerful simulators come on-line. The latter is
important as a major limitation of this work is that the machine learning-derived models did
not include physiological components and have not yet been tested in spatially-realistic
simulators to probe all of their patterning properties.

Such machine-learning approaches can uncover networks with unknown components.
Fortunately, computational techniques are now available to provide putative identities for
unknown elements, that can be tested in model validation [173]. This strategy was used to
identify one of the novel elements in the planarian network as the HNF4 factor, which
subsequent functional testing via RNAi confirmed [174].

An important aspect of this effort is being able to invert the models: using them to predict
functional interventions that will have a specific desired outcome. This is an essential
component of leveraging model systems such as planaria for progress in regenerative
medicine. An example of this is the recent automated discovery of a bioelectric and
serotonergic signaling network explaining stochastic conversion of normal pigment cells to a
melanoma phenotype by bioelectrical disregulation [175]. While the molecular signaling
components at the cell-level were known [123], the system-level dynamics were unclear. For
any specific disruption of bioelectric signaling among somatic cells, some percentage of the
animals in a cohort converted normal melanocytes to a melanoma-like behavior. What was
completely unclear was how all of the cells within a certain animal coordinated their
decision to react in an all-or-none manner, why animals treated in the same dish exhibited
distinct outcomes, and how the number of affected animals in any specific perturbation
could be predicted. This problem has important parallels understanding the stochastic
outcomes of planaria in which bioelectrical systems have been altered [132]. A
computational search analyzed the network as a dynamical system, identified the main
drivers that lock the system into one of several global attractor states, and proposed an
intervention consisting of two drugs and one specific protein misexpression, that would
break the concordance [176]. Testing confirmed the prediction, producing the first partially-
hyperpigmented animals [177]. Future developments in the field of planarian regeneration
will likewise make use of dynamical systems analysis and computational model inference to
not only identify explanatory models but also identify specific interventions to drive desired
morphological outcomes in the context of increasingly-complex regulatory networks.
Applicability of other frameworks, such as P-systems [178], agent-based dynamics of target
morphology [179–181] and connectionist models [141] remains to be investigated.


[PAGE 15] 4. Conclusion
Planaria reflect many of the fundamental mysteries facing us in the new century of
interdisciplinary biology. As a model amenable to molecular-genetic, developmental,
regenerative, and behavioral research, this remarkable model species is at the intersection of
not only evolutionary biology and biomedicine but also synthetic bioengineering and
information science. We argue that one of the main benefits of this model is to facilitate a
focus not only on the mechanisms that control regeneration, but also on the algorithms and
information-processing mechanisms implemented in planarian tissues. Some of the most
exciting advances in the biosciences revolve around morphogenetic engineering [31, 32],
morphological computation [34, 182, 183], and cellular perception/decision-making [184–
186]. Planaria represent a proof of principle of a remarkable “computational medium” – a
material that actively fulfills a complex design spec while itself being drastically remodeled,
and a system in which the control circuitry and the body it controls are one and the same.
Planaria are an ideal lens through which to develop new techniques, data, and conceptual
approaches to advance the intersection of these fields, with numerous applications for the
biomedicine of anatomical control and the understanding of the relationship between
genome and anatomy.

Given that the genome directly encodes proteins, not anatomical structures, how do tissues
store information about the pattern to which they must regenerate? By regenerating from
pieces (no obligate Weismann's barrier), planaria are helping to reveal new perspectives on
the question of where anatomical pattern is specified [45, 61, 187]. Planaria with a normal
histological configuration and genome can permanently store (and regenerate to) one of
several target morphologies [132]. The recent work on bioelectrical re-specification of
pattern memory, producing permanent lines of double-headed or stochastically-destabilized
(cryptic) planaria, may have important implications for the evolution of bodyplans [52, 61].
Future work will determine to what extent evolution exploits the plasticity of physiological
software in concert with classical genetic change, in the implementation of bodies and their
repair circuits [188]. Here, we have argued that the dynamics of regenerating planaria offer
an ideal system in which to quantitatively integrate the perspectives of molecular-genetics,
dynamical systems theory, biophysical self-organizing processes, and computation. Recent
approaches provide rich fodder for this effort, including advances in the mechanisms of
bioelectrical pattern control and biorealistic modeling that facilitates machine learning
approaches to model discovery and extraction of systems-level insights from molecular
mechanisms.

Importantly, future efforts must begin to expand from AP polarity and head number, to
understanding of actual shape (of species-specific heads, and overall planarian anatomy in
three dimensions). At the moment, our understanding of planarian shape is insufficient to
derive planaria-specific morphologies from genomic or any other data. A focus on shape is
essential, not only because of the demonstrated multi-stability of the planarian regenerative
outcome but because sometimes molecular marker expression and anatomy diverge; for
example tail markers can be expressed in tissues that have the overall shape of heads [151],
challenging the community to be explicit of what criteria are considered the gold standard
by which "identity” of a structure can be determined.

[PAGE 16] 
Specific directions for future research provide a fertile ground for young new scientists
entering this field, linking planarian regeneration to profound directions facing biology at
large. The understanding of variability is one; how can clonal animals, raised in the same
container and exposed to the same reagent/stimuli in the same dish, exhibit such different
responses, as observed in the stochastic outcomes of bioelectric modulation [132] and in the
behavioral responses in memory and drug addiction research [24, 25, 189]? Robustness is
another; despite the huge variability in cell number, damage type, and genetics, planaria
reliably exhibit unfailing anatomical homeostasis. This kind of goal-directed process, able to
harness individual cell behaviors toward the anatomical needs of the host organism, poses a
fascinating design challenge not only for biologists but also for roboticists and engineers
seeking to improve on today's brittle technology.

It is clear that biologists will have to expand not only the toolkits (bringing (opto)genetics to
planaria) but also the conceptual apparatus, if we hope to understand what regenerating
planaria are telling us about biology. It remains to be seen which type of paradigm for
understanding pattern memory and its elaboration during regeneration will be the most
effective; connectionist and Least Action/Active Inference ideas from neuroscience and
physics [190-192], are possible candidates. Importantly however, the explosion of
molecular, genetic, physiological, and functional data in this field also provide a context for
learning to extract wisdom and actionable intelligence from large volumes of data. New
efforts in the bioinformatics of shape, with experimental testing in the planarian model, will
facilitate the contributions of artificial intelligence to assist human researchers in cracking
the secrets of planaria and exploiting them for unprecedented advances in biomedicine.

[PAGE 16] Acknowledgments
We thank the Joshua LaPalme, other members of the Levin lab, Emili Salò, and many members of the planarian
community for helpful discussions, and Joshua Finkelstein for comments on the draft. This paper is dedicated to the
memory of C. M. Child, G. Marsh, and H. W. Beams - original pioneers in the physiology of planarian
regeneration. This work was supported by an Allen Discovery Center award from The Paul G. Allen Frontiers
Group (12171). The authors gratefully acknowledge support from the National Institutes of Health (AR055993,
AR061988), the G. Harold and Leila Y. Mathers Charitable Foundation (TFU141), National Science Foundation
award #CBET-0939511, the W. M. KECK Foundation (5903), and the Templeton World Charity Foundation
(TWCF0089/AB55).

Levin et al.
Page 17
8. Lobo D, Beane WS, Levin M. Modeling planarian regeneration: a primer for reverse-engineering the
worm. PLoS computational biology. 8(4)2012; :e1002481.
9. Sheiman IM, Kreshchenko ND. Regeneration of Planarians: Experimental Object. Russ J Dev Biol
+. 46(1)2015; :1-9.
10. Adell T, Cebria F, Salo E. Gradients in planarian regeneration and homeostasis. Cold Spring
Harbor perspectives in biology. 2(1)2010; :a000505.
11. Salo E, Abril JF, Adell T, Cebria F, Eckelt K, Fernandez-Taboada E, Handberg-Thorsager M,
Iglesias M, Molina MD, Rodriguez-Esteban G. Planarian regeneration: achievements and future
directions after 20 years of research. Int J Dev Biol. 53(8–10)2009; :1317–27.
12. Oviedo NJ, Newmark PA, Sanchez Alvarado A. Allometric scaling and proportion regulation in the
freshwater planarian Schmidtea mediterranea. Dev Dyn. 226(2)2003; :326–33.
13. Bardeen CR, Baetjer FH. The inhibitive action of the Roentgen rays on regeneration in planarians.
Journal of Experimental Zoology. 1(1)1904; :191–195.
14. Salvetti A, Rossi L, Bonuccelli L, Lena A, Pugliesi C, Rainaldi G, Evangelista M, Gremigni V.
Adult stem cell plasticity: neoblast repopulation in non-lethally irradiated planarians. Dev Biol.
328(2)2009; :305-14.
15. Reddien PW, Bermange AL, Murfitt KJ, Jennings JR, Sanchez Alvarado A. Identification of genes
needed for regeneration, stem cell function, and tissue homeostasis by systematic gene
perturbation in planaria. Dev Cell. 8(5)2005; :635–49.
16. Wagner DE, Ho JJ, Reddien PW. Genetic regulators of a pluripotent adult stem cell system in
planarians identified by RNAi and clonal analysis. Cell stem cell. 10(3)2012; :299–311.
17. Wagner DE, Wang IE, Reddien PW. Clonogenic neoblasts are pluripotent adult stem cells that
underlie planarian regeneration. Science. 332(6031)2011; :811-6.
18. Dubois F. Contribution a l'etude de la migration des cellules de regeneration chez les Planaires
dulcicoles. Bull Biol Fr Belg. 831949; :213-83.
19. Hicks C, Sorocco D, Levin M. Automated analysis of behavior: A computer-controlled system for
drug screening and the investigation of learning. J Neurobiol. 66(9)2006; :977–90.
20. Cherkashin AN, Sheiman IM. Conditioning in planarians and RNA content. J Biol Psychol.
9(1)1967; :5-11.
21. Westerman RA. Somatic Inheritance of Habituation of Responses to Light in Planarians. Science.
140(3567)1963; :676–677.
22. Thompson R, McConnell JV. Classical conditioning in the planarian Dugesia dorotocephala.
Journal of comparative and physiological psychology. 481955; :65–68.
23. Humpheries B, McConnell JV. Factors affecting maze learning in planarians. Worm Runner's
Digest. 61964; :52-59.
24. McConnell, JV. The Worm Runner's Digest. Ann Arbor: Michigan; 1965. A manual of
psychological experimentation on planarians; 111
25. Shomrat T, Levin M. An automated training paradigm reveals long-term memory in planarians and
its persistence through head regeneration. The Journal of experimental biology. 216(Pt 20)2013; :
3799-810.
26. Corning WC. Retention of a position discrimination after regeneration in planarians. Psychanomic
Science. 51966; :17-18.
27. McConnell JV. Memory transfer through cannibalism in planarians. Journal of Neuropsychiatry.
31962; :42-48.
28. La A, Jacobson M, James V. Research on learning in the planarian. Carolina Tips. XXV(7)1962; :
25-27.
29. Oviedo NJ, Beane WS. Regeneration: The origin of cancer or a possible cure? Semin Cell Dev
Biol. 20(5)2009; :557–64.

Page 18
30. Seilern-Aspang, F, Kratochwill, L. Relation between regeneration and tumor growth, Regeneration
in animals and related problems. North-Holland Publishing Company; Amsterdam: 1965. 452-73.
31. Doursat R, Sanchez C. Growing fine-grained multicellular robots. Soft Robotics. 1(2)2014; :110-
121.
32. Doursat R, Sayama H, Michel O. A review of morphogenetic engineering. Nat Comput.
12(4)2013; :517-535.
33. Katz E. Biocomputing - tools, aims, perspectives. Curr Opin Biotechnol. 342015; :202–8.
34. Fuchslin RM, Dzyakanchuk A, Flumini D, Hauser H, Hunt KJ, Luchsinger RH, Reller B,
Scheidegger S, Walker R. Morphological computation and morphological control: steps toward a
formal theory and applications. Artificial life. 19(1)2013; :9–34.
35. Hauser H, Ijspeert AJ, Fuchslin RM, Pfeifer R, Maass W. Towards a theoretical foundation for
morphological computation with compliant bodies. Biological cybernetics. 2012
36. Kano T, Sato E, Ono T, Aonuma H, Matsuzaka Y, Ishiguro A. A brittle star-like robot capable of
immediately adapting to unexpected physical damage. Roy Soc Open Sci. 4(12)2017;
37. Bongard J, Zykov V, Lipson H. Resilient machines through continuous self-modeling. Science.
314(5802)2006; :1118–21.
38. Pfeifer R, Gomez G. Morphological Computation - Connecting Brain, Body, and Environment.
Creating Brain-Like Intelligence: From Basic Principles to Complex Intelligent Systems.
54362009; :66-83.
39. Pezzulo G, Levin M. Re-membering the body: applications of computational neuroscience to the
top-down control of regeneration of limbs and other complex organs. Integr Biol (Camb).
7(12)2015; :1487–517.
40. Friston K, Levin M, Sengupta B, Pezzulo G. Knowing one's place: a free-energy approach to
pattern regulation. J R Soc Interface. 12(105)2015;
41. Mangel M, Bonsall MB, Aboobaker A. Feedback control in planarian stem cell systems. BMC Syst
Biol. 10(1)2016; :17.
42. Hwang B, An Y, Agata K, Umesono Y. Two distinct roles of the yorkie/yap gene during
homeostasis in the planarian Dugesia japonica. Dev Growth Differ. 57(3)2015; :209–17.
43. Hill EM, Petersen CP. Wnt/Notum spatial feedback inhibition controls neoblast differentiation to
regulate reversible growth of the planarian brain. Development. 2015
44. Owlarn S, Bartscherer K. Go ahead, grow a head! A planarian's guide to anterior regeneration.
Regeneration (Oxf). 3(3)2016; :139–55.
45. Neuhof M, Levin M, Rechavi O. Vertically- and horizontally-transmitted memories - the fading
boundaries between regeneration and inheritance in planaria. Biol Open. 5(9)2016; :1177–88.
46. Guo L, Accorsi A, He S, Guerrero-Hernández C, Sivagnanam S, McKinney S, Gibson M, Sánchez
Alvarado A. An adaptable chromosome preparation methodology for use in invertebrate research
organisms. BMC Biology. 16(1)2018; :25.
47. Nishimura O, Hosoda K, Kawaguchi E, Yazawa S, Hayashi T, Inoue T, Umesono Y, Agata K.
Unusually Large Number of Mutations in Asexually Reproducing Clonal Planarian Dugesia
japonica. PLoS One. 10(11)2015; :e0143525.
48. Grohme MA, Schloissnig S, Rozanski A, Pippel M, Young GR, Winkler S, Brandl H, Henry I,
Dahl A, Powell S, Hiller M, Myers E, Rink JC. The genome of Schmidtea mediterranea and the
evolution of core cellular mechanisms. Nature. 554(7690)2018; :56–61.
49. Ross KG, Currie KW, Pearson BJ, Zayas RM. Nervous system development and regeneration in
freshwater planarians. Wiley Interdiscip Rev Dev Biol. 2017
50. Barghouth PG, Thiruvalluvan M, Oviedo NJ. Bioelectrical regulation of cell cycle and the
planarian model system. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2015
51. Robb SM, Sanchez Alvarado A. Histone modifications and regeneration in the planarian Schmidtea
mediterranea. Current topics in developmental biology. 1082014; :71-93.

Page 19
52. Fields C, Levin M. Multiscale memory and bioelectric error correction in the cytoplasm-
cytoskeleton-membrane system. Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Systems Biology and Medicine.
2017:e1410.
53. Robertson JA. Galvanotropic reactions of Polycelis nigra in relation to inherent electrical polarity.
Brit J Exp Biol. 51927; :66–88.
54. Hyman L. Studies on the correlation between metabolic gradients, electrical gradients, and
galvanotaxis II: Galvanotaxis of the brown hydra and some non-fissioning planarians. Physiol
Zool. 5(2)1932; :185-190.
55. Marsh G, Beams HW. Electrical Control of Growth Polarity in Regenerating Dugesia- Tigrina.
Federation Proceedings. 6(1)1947; :163–164.
56. Marsh G, Beams HW. Electrical control of morphogenesis in regenerating dugesia tigrina. I.
Relation of axial polarity to field strength. J Cell Comp Physiol. 39(2)1952; :191–213.
57. Bonaventure N. Galvanotropisme De Regenerats Monstrueux De Planaires - Monstres Bifides Et
Heteromorphoses. Comptes Rendus Des Seances De La Societe De Biologie Et De Ses Filiales.
151(3)1957; :598-602.
58. Levin M, Pezzulo G, Finkelstein JM. Endogenous Bioelectric Signaling Networks: Exploiting
Voltage Gradients for Control of Growth and Form. Annual Review of Biomedical Engineering.
192017; :353-387.
59. Bates E. Ion Channels in Development and Cancer. Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol. 312015; :231–47.
60. Rasskin-Gutman D, Izpisua-Belmonte JC. Theoretical morphology of developmental asymmetries.
Bioessays. 26(4)2004; :405–12.
61. Sullivan KG, Emmons-Bell M, Levin M. Physiological inputs regulate species-specific anatomy
during embryogenesis and regeneration. Commun Integr Biol. 9(4)2016; :e1192733.
62. Wildman MH, Cannone AJ. Action potentials in a 'non-spiking' neurone: graded responses and
spikes in the afferent P fibre of the crab thoracic-coxal muscle receptor organ. Brain Res.
509(2)1990; :339-42.
63. Min R, Santello M, Nevian T. The computational power of astrocyte mediated synaptic plasticity.
Front Comput Neurosci. 62012; :93.
64. Angarita-Jaimes N, Dewhirst OP, Simpson DM, Kondoh Y, Allen R, Newland PL. The dynamics of
analogue signalling in local networks controlling limb movement. The European journal of
neuroscience. 36(9)2012; :3269-82.
65. Marin-Burgin A, Szczupak L. Processing of sensory signals by a non-spiking neuron in the leech. J
Comp Physiol (A). 186(10)2000; :989–97.
66. Victor JD. Temporal aspects of neural coding in the retina and lateral geniculate. Network.
10(4)1999; :R1-66.
67. Lyon P. The biogenic approach to cognition. Cogn Process. 7(1)2006; :11-29.
68. Baluska F, Levin M. On Having No Head: Cognition throughout Biological Systems. Front
Psychol. 72016; :902.
69. Liebeskind BJ, Hillis DM, Zakon HH. Evolution of sodium channels predates the origin of nervous
systems in animals. Proc Natl Acad Sci US A. 108(22)2011; :9154–9.
70. Harris KD, Weiss M, Zahavi A. Why are neurotransmitters neurotoxic? An evolutionary
perspective. F1000Res. 32014; :179.
71. Levin M, Buznikov GA, Lauder JM. Of minds and embryos: left-right asymmetry and the
serotonergic controls of pre-neural morphogenesis. Dev Neurosci. 28(3)2006; :171–85.
72. Pitcairn E, McLaughlin KA. Bioelectric signaling coordinates patterning decisions during
embryogenesis. Trends in Developmental Biology. 92016; :1–9.
73. Levin M, Martyniuk CJ. The bioelectric code: An ancient computational medium for dynamic
control of growth and form. Biosystems. 2017

Page 20
74. McLaughlin KA, Levin M. Bioelectric signaling in regeneration: Mechanisms of ionic controls of
growth and form. Dev Biol. 433(2)2018; :177-189.
75. Pullar, CE. The physiology of bioelectricity in development, tissue regeneration, and cancer. CRC
Press; Boca Raton: 2011.
76. Lund, E. Bioelectric fields and growth. Univ. of Texas Press; Austin: 1947.
77. Morgan TH, Dimon AC. An examination of the problem of physiological 'polarity' and electrical
polarity in the earthworm. Journal of Experimental Zoology I. 1904
78. Morgan, TH. Regeneration in planarians. Bryn Mawr. Pa; 1901.
79. Child CM. The problem of pattern in organisms II. The physiological gradients. American
Naturalist. 581924; :322-336.
80. Marsh G, Beams HW. Electrical Control of Growth Axis in a Regenerating Annelid. Anatomical
Record. 108(3)1950; :512-512.
81. Marsh G, Beams HW. Electrical Control of Axial Polarity in a Regenerating Annelid. Anatomical
Record. 105(3)1949; :513-514.
82. Lange CS, Steele VE. The mechanism of anterior-posterior polarity control in planarians.
Differentiation. 11(1)1978; :1–12.
83. Steele VE, Lange CS. Characterization of an organ-specific differentiator substance in the
planarian Dugesia etrusca. J Embryol Exp Morphol. 37(1)1977; :159–72.
84. Levin M. Is the early left-right axis like a plant, a kidney, or a neuron? The integration of
physiological signals in embryonic asymmetry. Birth Defects Res C Embryo Today. 78(3)2006; :
191-223.
85. Oviedo NJ, Nicolas CL, Adams DS, Levin M. Live Imaging of Planarian Membrane Potential
Using DiBAC4(3). Cold Spring Harb Protoc. 2008; (11)
86. Adams DS, Levin M. Measuring resting membrane potential using the fluorescent voltage
reporters DiBAC4(3) and CC2-DMPE. Cold Spring Harbor protocols. 2012(4)2012; :459–64.
87. Adams DS, Levin M. General principles for measuring resting membrane potential and ion
concentration using fluorescent bioelectricity reporters. Cold Spring Harbor protocols.
2012(4)2012; :385-97.
88. Adams DS. A new tool for tissue engineers: ions as regulators of morphogenesis during
development and regeneration. Tissue engineering. 14(9)2008; :1461–8.
89. Adams DS, Levin M. Endogenous voltage gradients as mediators of cell-cell communication:
strategies for investigating bioelectrical signals during pattern formation. Cell Tissue Res.
352(1)2013; :95-122.
90. Levin M, Thorlin T, Robinson KR, Nogi T, Mercola M. Asymmetries in H+/K+-ATPase and cell
membrane potentials comprise a very early step in left-right patterning. Cell. 111(1)2002; :77-89.
91. Pai VP, Lemire JM, Pare JF, Lin G, Chen Y, Levin M. Endogenous Gradients of Resting Potential
Instructively Pattern Embryonic Neural Tissue via Notch Signaling and Regulation of
Proliferation. The Journal of Neuroscience. 35(10)2015; :4366-85.
92. Perathoner S, Daane JM, Henrion U, Seebohm G, Higdon CW, Johnson SL, Nusslein-Volhard C,
Harris MP. Bioelectric signaling regulates size in zebrafish fins. PLoS genetics.
10(1)2014; :e1004080.
93. Dahal GR, Pradhan SJ, Bates EA. Inwardly rectifying potassium channels influence Drosophila
wing morphogenesis by regulating Dpp release. Development. 144(15)2017; :2771–2783.
94. Tseng AS, Beane WS, Lemire JM, Masi A, Levin M. Induction of vertebrate regeneration by a
transient sodium current. J Neurosci. 30(39)2010; :13192–200.
95. Adams DS, Uzel SG, Akagi J, Wlodkowic D, Andreeva V, Yelick PC, Devitt-Lee A, Pare JF, Levin
M. Bioelectric signalling via potassium channels: a mechanism for craniofacial dysmorphogenesis
in KCNJ2-associated Andersen-Tawil Syndrome. J Physiol. 594(12)2016; :3245-3270.


Page 21
96. Masotti A, Uva P, Davis-Keppen L, Basel-Vanagaite L, Cohen L, Pisaneschi E, Celluzzi A,
Bencivenga P, Fang M, Tian M, Xu X, Cappa M, Dallapiccola B. Keppen-Lubinsky Syndrome Is
Caused by Mutations in the Inwardly Rectifying K(+) Channel Encoded by KCNJ6. Am J Hum
Genet. 96(2)2015; :295–300.
97. Chernet BT, Adams DS, Lobikin M, Levin M. Use of genetically encoded, light-gated ion
translocators to control tumorigenesis. Oncotarget. 7(15)2016; :19575–88.
98. Adams DS, Lemire JM, Kramer RH, Levin M. Optogenetics in Developmental Biology: using light
to control ion flux-dependent signals in Xenopus embryos. The International journal of
developmental biology. 582014; :851–861.
99. Adams DS, Tseng AS, Levin M. Light-activation of the Archaerhodopsin H(+)-pump reverses age-
dependent loss of vertebrate regeneration: sparking system-level controls in vivo. Biology open.
2(3)2013; :306-13.
100. Beane WS, Morokuma J, Adams DS, Levin M. A Chemical genetics approach reveals H,K-
ATPase-mediated membrane voltage is required for planarian head regeneration. Chemistry &
Biology. 18(1)2011; :77–89.
101. Beane WS, Morokuma J, Lemire JM, Levin M. Bioelectric signaling regulates head and organ
size during planarian regeneration. Development. 140(2)2013; :313–22.
102. Nuckels RJ, Ng A, Darland T, Gross JM. The vacuolar-ATPase complex regulates retinoblast
proliferation and survival, photoreceptor morphogenesis, and pigmentation in the zebrafish eye.
Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 50(2)2009; :893–905.
103. Palacios-Prado N, Bukauskas FF. Heterotypic gap junction channels as voltage-sensitive valves
for intercellular signaling. Proc Natl Acad Sci US A. 106(35)2009; :14855–60.
104. Mathews J, Levin M. Gap junctional signaling in pattern regulation: Physiological network
connectivity instructs growth and form. Developmental neurobiology. 77(5)2017; :643-673.
105. Oviedo NJ, Levin M. smedinx-11 is a planarian stem cell gap junction gene required for
regeneration and homeostasis. Development. 134(17)2007; :3121-31.
106. Oviedo NJ, Morokuma J, Walentek P, Kema IP, Gu MB, Ahn JM, Hwang JS, Gojobori T, Levin
M. Long-range neural and gap junction protein-mediated cues control polarity during planarian
regeneration. Dev Biol. 339(1)2010; :188–99.
107. Buznikov GA, Peterson RE, Nikitina LA, Bezuglov VV, Lauder JM. The Pre-nervous
Serotonergic System of Developing Sea Urchin Embryos and Larvae: Pharmacologic and
Immunocytochemical Evidence. Neurochem Res. 30(6–7)2005; :825–37.
108. Fukumoto T, Blakely R, Levin M. Serotonin transporter function is an early step in left-right
patterning in chick and frog embryos. Dev Neurosci. 27(6)2005; :349–63.
109. Fukumoto T, Kema I, Nazarenko D, Levin M. Serotonin is a novel very early signaling
mechanism in left-right asymmetry. Developmental Biology. 2592003; :490a.
110. Buznikov G, Shmukler Y, Lauder J. From oocyte to neuron: do neurotransmitters function in the
same way throughout development? Cell Molec Neurobiol. 16(5)1996; :537–59.
111. Villar D, Schaeffer DJ. Morphogenetic action of neurotransmitters on regenerating planarians--a
review. Biomed Environ Sci. 6(4)1993; :327-47.
112. Chan JD, Zhang D, Liu X, Zarowiecki M, Berriman M, Marchant JS. Utilizing the planarian
voltage-gated ion channel transcriptome to resolve a role for a Ca2+ channel in neuromuscular
function and regeneration. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1864(6)2017; :1036–1045.
113. Chan JD, Zhang D, Liu X, Zarowiecki MZ, Berriman M, Marchant JS. Dataset for a Dugesia
japonica de novo transcriptome assembly, utilized for defining the voltage-gated like ion channel
superfamily. Data Brief. 92016; :1044–1047.
114. Chan JD, McCorvy JD, Acharya S, Johns ME, Day TA, Roth BL, Marchant JS. A Miniaturized
Screen of a Schistosoma mansoni Serotonergic G Protein-Coupled Receptor Identifies Novel
Classes of Parasite-Selective Inhibitors. PLoS Pathog. 12(5)2016; :e1005651.

Levin et al.
Page 21
96. Masotti A, Uva P, Davis-Keppen L, Basel-Vanagaite L, Cohen L, Pisaneschi E, Celluzzi A,
Bencivenga P, Fang M, Tian M, Xu X, Cappa M, Dallapiccola B. Keppen-Lubinsky Syndrome Is
Caused by Mutations in the Inwardly Rectifying K(+) Channel Encoded by KCNJ6. Am J Hum
Genet. 96(2)2015; :295–300. [PubMed: 25620207]
97. Chernet BT, Adams DS, Lobikin M, Levin M. Use of genetically encoded, light-gated ion
translocators to control tumorigenesis. Oncotarget. 7(15)2016; :19575–88. [PubMed: 26988909]
98. Adams DS, Lemire JM, Kramer RH, Levin M. Optogenetics in Developmental Biology: using light
to control ion flux-dependent signals in Xenopus embryos. The International journal of
developmental biology. 582014; :851–861. [PubMed: 25896279]
99. Adams DS, Tseng AS, Levin M. Light-activation of the Archaerhodopsin H(+)-pump reverses age-
dependent loss of vertebrate regeneration: sparking system-level controls in vivo. Biology open.
2(3)2013; :306-13. [PubMed: 23519324]
100. Beane WS, Morokuma J, Adams DS, Levin M. A Chemical genetics approach reveals H,K-
ATPase-mediated membrane voltage is required for planarian head regeneration. Chemistry &
Biology. 18(1)2011; :77–89. [PubMed: 21276941]
101. Beane WS, Morokuma J, Lemire JM, Levin M. Bioelectric signaling regulates head and organ
size during planarian regeneration. Development. 140(2)2013; :313–22. [PubMed: 23250205]
102. Nuckels RJ, Ng A, Darland T, Gross JM. The vacuolar-ATPase complex regulates retinoblast
proliferation and survival, photoreceptor morphogenesis, and pigmentation in the zebrafish eye.
Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 50(2)2009; :893–905. [PubMed: 18836173]
103. Palacios-Prado N, Bukauskas FF. Heterotypic gap junction channels as voltage-sensitive valves
for intercellular signaling. Proc Natl Acad Sci US A. 106(35)2009; :14855–60. [PubMed:
19706392]
104. Mathews J, Levin M. Gap junctional signaling in pattern regulation: Physiological network
connectivity instructs growth and form. Developmental neurobiology. 77(5)2017; :643-673.
[PubMed: 27265625]
105. Oviedo NJ, Levin M. smedinx-11 is a planarian stem cell gap junction gene required for
regeneration and homeostasis. Development. 134(17)2007; :3121-31. [PubMed: 17670787]
106. Oviedo NJ, Morokuma J, Walentek P, Kema IP, Gu MB, Ahn JM, Hwang JS, Gojobori T, Levin
M. Long-range neural and gap junction protein-mediated cues control polarity during planarian
regeneration. Dev Biol. 339(1)2010; :188–99. [PubMed: 20026026]
107. Buznikov GA, Peterson RE, Nikitina LA, Bezuglov VV, Lauder JM. The Pre-nervous
Serotonergic System of Developing Sea Urchin Embryos and Larvae: Pharmacologic and
Immunocytochemical Evidence. Neurochem Res. 30(6–7)2005; :825–37. [PubMed: 16187217]
108. Fukumoto T, Blakely R, Levin M. Serotonin transporter function is an early step in left-right
patterning in chick and frog embryos. Dev Neurosci. 27(6)2005; :349–63. [PubMed: 16280633]
109. Fukumoto T, Kema I, Nazarenko D, Levin M. Serotonin is a novel very early signaling
mechanism in left-right asymmetry. Developmental Biology. 2592003; :490a.
110. Buznikov G, Shmukler Y, Lauder J. From oocyte to neuron: do neurotransmitters function in the
same way throughout development? Cell Molec Neurobiol. 16(5)1996; :537–59. [PubMed:
8956008]
111. Villar D, Schaeffer DJ. Morphogenetic action of neurotransmitters on regenerating planarians--a
review. Biomed Environ Sci. 6(4)1993; :327-47. [PubMed: 7911023]
112. Chan JD, Zhang D, Liu X, Zarowiecki M, Berriman M, Marchant JS. Utilizing the planarian
voltage-gated ion channel transcriptome to resolve a role for a Ca2+ channel in neuromuscular
function and regeneration. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1864(6)2017; :1036–1045.
113. Chan JD, Zhang D, Liu X, Zarowiecki MZ, Berriman M, Marchant JS. Dataset for a Dugesia
japonica de novo transcriptome assembly, utilized for defining the voltage-gated like ion channel
superfamily. Data Brief. 92016; :1044–1047. [PubMed: 27909700]
114. Chan JD, McCorvy JD, Acharya S, Johns ME, Day TA, Roth BL, Marchant JS. A Miniaturized
Screen of a Schistosoma mansoni Serotonergic G Protein-Coupled Receptor Identifies Novel
Classes of Parasite-Selective Inhibitors. PLoS Pathog. 12(5)2016; :e1005651. [PubMed:
27187180]

Page 22
115. Chan JD, Grab T, Marchant JS. Kinetic profiling an abundantly expressed planarian serotonergic
GPCR identifies bromocriptine as a perdurant antagonist. Int J Parasitol Drugs Drug Resist.
6(3)2016; :356-363. [PubMed: 27397764]
116. Chan JD, Agbedanu PN, Zamanian M, Gruba SM, Haynes CL, Day TA, Marchant JS. 'Death and
Axes': Unexpected Ca(2+) Entry Phenologs Predict New Anti-schistosomal Agents. PLoS
Pathog. 10(2)2014; :e1003942. [PubMed: 24586156]
117. Zhang D, Chan JD, Nogi T, Marchant JS. Opposing roles of voltage-gated Ca2+ channels in
neuronal control of regenerative patterning. The Journal of neuroscience : the official journal of
the Society for Neuroscience. 31(44)2011; :15983–95. [PubMed: 22049441]
118. Nogi T, Zhang D, Chan JD, Marchant JS. A novel biological activity of praziquantel requiring
voltage-operated ca channel Beta subunits: subversion of flatworm regenerative polarity. PLoS
neglected tropical diseases. 3(6)2009; :e464. [PubMed: 19554083]
119. Nguyen QT, Schroeder LF, Mank M, Muller A, Taylor P, Griesbeck O, Kleinfeld D. An in vivo
biosensor for neurotransmitter release and in situ receptor activity. Nat Neurosci. 13(1)2010; :
127-32. [PubMed: 20010818]
120. Balaconis MK, Clark HA. Biodegradable optode-based nanosensors for in vivo monitoring. Anal
Chem. 84(13)2012; :5787–93. [PubMed: 22725692]
121. Cabrera R, Filevich O, Garcia-Acosta B, Athilingam J, Bender KJ, Poskanzer KE, Etchenique R.
A Visible-Light-Sensitive Caged Serotonin. ACS Chem Neurosci. 8(5)2017; :1036–1042.
[PubMed: 28460173]
122. Rea AC, Vandenberg LN, Ball RE, Snouffer AA, Hudson AG, Zhu Y, McLain DE, Johnston LL,
Lauderdale JD, Levin M, Dore TM. Light-activated serotonin for exploring its action in
biological systems. Chemistry & biology. 20(12)2013; :1536–46. [PubMed: 24333002]
123. Blackiston D, Adams DS, Lemire JM, Lobikin M, Levin M. Transmembrane potential of GlyCl-
expressing instructor cells induces a neoplastic-like conversion of melanocytes via a serotonergic
pathway. Disease models & mechanisms. 4(1)2011; :67–85. [PubMed: 20959630]
124. Emmons-Bell M, Durant F, Hammelman J, Bessonov N, Volpert V, Morokuma J, Pinet K, Adams
DS, Pietak A, Lobo D, Levin M. Gap Junctional Blockade Stochastically Induces Different
Species-Specific Head Anatomies in Genetically Wild-Type Girardia dorotocephala Flatworms.
Int J Mol Sci. 16(11)2015; :27865–96. [PubMed: 26610482]
125. Pietak A, Levin M. Bioelectric gene and reaction networks: computational modelling of genetic,
biochemical and bioelectrical dynamics in pattern regulation. J R Soc Interface. 14(134)2017;
126. Pezzulo G, Levin M. Top-down models in biology: explanation and control of complex living
systems above the molecular level. J R Soc Interface. 13(124)2016;
127. Thompson, DAW, Whyte, LL. On growth and form. The University Press; Cambridge Eng: 1942.
A new ed
128. Lau K, Tao H, Liu H, Wen J, Sturgeon K, Sorfazlian N, Lazic S, Burrows JT, Wong MD, Li D,
Deimling S, Ciruna B, Scott I, Simmons C, Henkelman RM, Williams T, Hadjantonakis AK,
Fernandez-Gonzalez R, Sun Y, Hopyan S. Anisotropic stress orients remodelling of mammalian
limb bud ectoderm. Nat Cell Biol. 17(5)2015; :569–79. [PubMed: 25893915]
129. Munjal A, Philippe JM, Munro E, Lecuit T. A self-organized biomechanical network drives shape
changes during tissue morphogenesis. Nature. 524(7565)2015; :351–5. [PubMed: 26214737]
130. Bubenik AB, Pavlansky R. Trophic responses to trauma in growing antlers. J Exp Zool.
159(3)1965; :289-302. [PubMed: 5883952]
131. Lobo D, Solano M, Bubenik GA, Levin M. A linear-encoding model explains the variability of
the target morphology in regeneration. Journal of the Royal Society, Interface / the Royal Society.
11(92)2014; :20130918.
132. Durant F, Morokuma J, Fields C, Williams K, Adams DS, Levin M. Long-Term, Stochastic
Editing of Regenerative Anatomy via Targeting Endogenous Bioelectric Gradients. Biophys J.
112(10)2017; :2231-2243. [PubMed: 28538159]
133. Hubert A, Henderson JM, Ross KG, Cowles MW, Torres J, Zayas RM. Epigenetic regulation of
planarian stem cells by the SET1/MLL family of histone methyltransferases. Epigenetics.
8(1)2013; :79-91. [PubMed: 23235145]


Page 23
134. Pietak A, Levin M. Exploring Instructive Physiological Signaling with the Bioelectric Tissue
Simulation Engine (BETSE). Frontiers in Bioengineering and Biotechnology. 42016;
135. Burr HS, Northrop FSC. The electro-dynamic theory of life. Quarterly Review of Biology.
10(3)1935; :322-333.
136. Cervera J, Meseguer S, Mafe S. The interplay between genetic and bioelectrical signaling permits
a spatial regionalisation of membrane potentials in model multicellular ensembles. Sci Rep.
62016; :35201. [PubMed: 27731412]
137. Tseng AS, Levin M. Transducing bioelectric signals into epigenetic pathways during tadpole tail
regeneration. Anatomical record. 295(10)2012; :1541-51.
138. Ryland KE, Hawkins AG, Weisenberger DJ, Punj V, Borinstein SC, Laird PW, Martens JR,
Lawlor ER. Promoter Methylation Analysis Reveals That KCNA5 Ion Channel Silencing
Supports Ewing Sarcoma Cell Proliferation. Mol Cancer Res. 14(1)2016; :26-34. [PubMed:
26573141]
139. Cherry JL, Adler FR. How to make a biological switch. J Theor Biol. 203(2)2000; :117–33.
[PubMed: 10704297]
140. Stuckemann T, Cleland JP, Werner S, Thi-Kim Vu H, Bayersdorf R, Liu SY, Friedrich B, Julicher
F, Rink JC. Antagonistic Self-Organizing Patterning Systems Control Maintenance and
Regeneration of the Anteroposterior Axis in Planarians. Dev Cell. 40(3)2017; :248-263e4.
[PubMed: 28171748]
141. De A, Chakravarthy VS, Levin M. A computational model of planarian regeneration.
International Journal of Parallel, Emergent and Distributed Systems. 2016:1–17.
142. Morgan TH. Experimental studies of the regeneration of Planaria maculata. Arch
Entwicklungsmech Org. 71898; :364-397.
143. Castillo-Lara S, Abril JF. PlanNET: Homology-based predicted interactome for multiple planarian
transcriptomes. Bioinformatics. 2017
144. Brandl H, Moon H, Vila-Farre M, Liu SY, Henry I, Rink JC. PlanMine--a mineable resource of
planarian biology and biodiversity. Nucleic Acids Res. 44(D1)2016; :D764–73. [PubMed:
26578570]
145. Werner S, Stückemann T, Beirán Amigo M, Rink JC, Jülicher F, Friedrich BM. Scaling and
Regeneration of Self-Organized Patterns. Physical Review Letters. 114(13)2015; :138101.
[PubMed: 25884138]
146. Meinhardt H. Beta-catenin and axis formation in planarians. Bioessays. 31(1)2009; :5–9.
[PubMed: 19154002]
147. Lander AD. Morpheus unbound: reimagining the morphogen gradient. Cell. 128(2)2007; :245-
56. [PubMed: 17254964]
148. Witchley JN, Mayer M, Wagner DE, Owen JH, Reddien PW. Muscle cells provide instructions for
planarian regeneration. Cell Rep. 4(4)2013; :633–41. [PubMed: 23954785]
149. Scimone ML, Cote LE, Rogers T, Reddien PW. Two FGFRL-Wnt circuits organize the planarian
anteroposterior axis. Elife. 52016;
150. Almuedo-Castillo M, Sureda-Gomez M, Adell T. Wnt signaling in planarians: new answers to old
questions. Int J Dev Biol. 56(1–3)2012; :53–65. [PubMed: 22450995]
151. Gurley KA, Rink JC, Sanchez Alvarado A. Beta-catenin defines head versus tail identity during
planarian regeneration and homeostasis. Science. 319(5861)2008; :323–7. [PubMed: 18063757]
152. Sureda-Gomez M, Pascual-Carreras E, Adell T. Posterior Wnts Have Distinct Roles in
Specification and Patterning of the Planarian Posterior Region. Int J Mol Sci. 16(11)2015; :
26543-54. [PubMed: 26556349]
153. Agata K, Tasaki J, Nakajima E, Umesono Y. Recent identification of an ERK signal gradient
governing planarian regeneration. Zoology (Jena). 117(3)2014; :161-2. [PubMed: 24854393]
154. Umesono Y, Tasaki J, Nishimura Y, Hrouda M, Kawaguchi E, Yazawa S, Nishimura O, Hosoda
K, Inoue T, Agata K. The molecular logic for planarian regeneration along the anterior-posterior
axis. Nature. 500(7460)2013; :73-6. [PubMed: 23883928]
155. Tasaki J, Shibata N, Nishimura O, Itomi K, Tabata Y, Son F, Suzuki N, Araki R, Abe M, Agata K,
Umesono Y. ERK signaling controls blastema cell differentiation during planarian regeneration.
Development. 138(12)2011; :2417-27. [PubMed: 21610023]


Page 24
156. Lander R, Petersen CP. Wnt, Ptk7, and FGFRL expression gradients control trunk positional
identity in planarian regeneration. Elife. 52016;
157. Wang IE, Lapan SW, Scimone ML, Clandinin TR, Reddien PW. Hedgehog signaling regulates
gene expression in planarian glia. Elife. 52016;
158. Yazawa S, Umesono Y, Hayashi T, Tarui H, Agata K. Planarian Hedgehog/Patched establishes
anterior-posterior polarity by regulating Wnt signaling. Proc Natl Acad Sci US A.
106(52)2009; :22329-34. [PubMed: 20018728]
159. Petersen CP, Reddien PW. Polarized notum activation at wounds inhibits Wnt function to promote
planarian head regeneration. Science. 332(6031)2011; :852–5. [PubMed: 21566195]
160. Meinhardt H. Models for the generation and interpretation of gradients. Cold Spring Harbor
perspectives in biology. 1(4)2009; :a001362. [PubMed: 20066097]
161. Meinhardt H, Gierer A. Pattern formation by local self-activation and lateral inhibition.
Bioessays. 22(8)2000; :753–60. [PubMed: 10918306]
162. Nuccitelli R. Endogenous ionic currents and DC electric fields in multicellular animal tissues.
Bioelectromagnetics Suppl. 11992; :147-57.
163. Nuccitelli R. Endogenous electric fields in embryos during development regeneration and wound
healing. Radiat Prot Dosimetry. 106(4)2003; :375-83. [PubMed: 14690282]
164. Zhang Y, Levin M. Particle tracking model of electrophoretic morphogen movement reveals
stochastic dynamics of embryonic gradient. Dev Dyn. 238(8)2009; :1923–35. [PubMed:
19618466]
165. Blackiston DJ, Anderson GM, Rahman N, Bieck C, Levin M. A novel method for inducing nerve
growth via modulation of host resting potential: gap junction-mediated and serotonergic signaling
mechanisms. Neurotherapeutics. 12(1)2015; :170–84. [PubMed: 25449797]
166. Dimmitt J, Marsh G. Electrical Control of Morphogenesis in Regenerating Dugesia- Tigrina. 2.
Potential Gradient Vs Current Density as Control Factors. J Cell Comp Physiol. 40(1)1952; :11-
23. [PubMed: 12981131]
167. Ghosh S. Application of Computational Methods in Planaria Research: A Current Update. J
Integr Bioinform. 2017
168. Lobo D, Levin M. Inferring Regulatory Networks from Experimental Morphological Phenotypes:
A Computational Method Reverse-Engineers Planarian Regeneration. PLoS computational
biology. 11(6)2015; :e1004295. [PubMed: 26042810]
169. Lobo D, Malone TJ, Levin M. Planform: an application and database of graph-encoded planarian
regenerative experiments. Bioinformatics. 2013
170. Lobo D, Malone TJ, Levin M. Towards a bioinformatics of patterning: a computational approach
to understanding regulative morphogenesis. Biology Open. 2(2)2013; :156–69. [PubMed:
23429669]
171. Meinhardt H. Models of biological pattern formation: from elementary steps to the organization
of embryonic axes. Current topics in developmental biology. 812008; :1-63. [PubMed:
18023723]
172. Sparkes A, Aubrey W, Byrne E, Clare A, Khan MN, Liakata M, Markham M, Rowland J,
Soldatova LN, Whelan KE, Young M, King RD. Towards Robot Scientists for autonomous
scientific discovery. Autom Exp. 22010; :1. [PubMed: 20119518]
173. Lobo D, Hammelman J, Levin M. MoCha: Molecular Characterization of Unknown Pathways. J
Comput Biol. 23(4)2016; :291–7. [PubMed: 26950055]
174. Lobo D, Morokuma J, Levin M. Computational discovery and in vivo validation of hnf4 as a
regulatory gene in planarian regeneration. Bioinformatics. 32(17)2016; :2681–5. [PubMed:
27166245]
175. Lobikin M, Chernet B, Lobo D, Levin M. Resting potential, oncogene-induced tumorigenesis,
and metastasis: the bioelectric basis of cancer in vivo. Physical biolog. 9(6)2012; :065002.
176. Lobikin M, Lobo D, Blackiston DJ, Martyniuk CJ, Tkachenko E, Levin M. Serotonergic
regulation of melanocyte conversion: A bioelectrically regulated network for stochastic all-or-
none hyperpigmentation. Sci Signal. 8(397)2015; :ra99. [PubMed: 26443706]


Page 25
177. Lobo D, Lobikin M, Levin M. Discovering novel phenotypes with automatically inferred dynamic
models: a partial melanocyte conversion in Xenopus. Sci Rep. 72017; :41339. [PubMed:
28128301]
178. García-Quismondo M, Levin M, Lobo D. Modeling regenerative processes with membrane
computing. Inf Sci. 3812017; :229-249.
179. Bessonov N, Levin M, Morozova N, Reinberg N, Tosenberger A, Volpert V. Target morphology
and cell memory: a model of regenerative pattern formation. Neural Regen Res. 10(12)2015; :
1901-5. [PubMed: 26889161]
180. Bessonov N, Levin M, Morozova N, Reinberg N, Tosenberger A, Volpert V. On a Model of
Pattern Regeneration Based on Cell Memory. PloS one. 10(2)2015; :e0118091. [PubMed:
25695252]
181. Tosenberger A, Bessonov N, Levin M, Reinberg N, Volpert V, Morozova N. A Conceptual Model
of Morphogenesis and Regeneration. Acta biotheoretica. 63(3)2015; :283–94. [PubMed:
25822060]
182. Pfeifer R, Iida F, Lungarella M. Cognition from the bottom up: on biological inspiration, body
morphology, and soft materials. Trends Cogn Sci. 18(8)2014; :404-413. [PubMed: 24839893]
183. Zahedi K, Ay N. Quantifying Morphological Computation. Entropy-Switz. 15(5)2013; :1887.
184. Wilson MZ, Ravindran PT, Lim WA, Toettcher JE. Tracing Information Flow from Erk to Target
Gene Induction Reveals Mechanisms of Dynamic and Combinatorial Control. Mol Cell.
67(5)2017; :757-769e5. [PubMed: 28826673]
185. Bugaj LJ, O'Donoghue GP, Lim WA. Interrogating cellular perception and decision making with
optogenetic tools. J Cell Biol. 216(1)2017; :25-28. [PubMed: 28003330]
186. Mitchell A, Lim W. Cellular perception and misperception: Internal models for decision-making
shaped by evolutionary experience. Bioessays. 38(9)2016; :845–9. [PubMed: 27461864]
187. Levin M. Endogenous bioelectrical networks store non-genetic patterning information during
development and regeneration. The Journal of Physiology. 592(11)2014; :2295–2305. [PubMed:
24882814]
188. Noble D. A theory of biological relativity: no privileged level of causation. Interface Focus.
2(1)2012; :55-64. [PubMed: 23386960]
189. Pagan OR, Baker D, Deats S, Montgomery E, Tenaglia M, Randolph C, Kotturu D, Tallarida C,
Bach D, Wilk G, Rawls S, Raffa RB. Planarians in pharmacology: parthenolide is a specific
behavioral antagonist of cocaine in the planarian Girardia tigrina. The International journal of
developmental biology. 56(1-3)2012; :193–6. [PubMed: 22451007]
190. Mcculloch WS, Pitts W. A Logical Calculus of the Ideas Immanent in Nervous Activity. Bulletin
of Mathematical Biology. 52(1–2)1990; :99–115. [PubMed: 2185863]
191. Friston K, Ao P. Free energy, value, and attractors. Comput Math Methods Med. 20122012; :
937860. [PubMed: 22229042]
192. Friston KJ, Daunizeau J, Kilner J, Kiebel SJ. Action and behavior: a free-energy formulation.
Biological cybernetics. 102(3)2010; :227–60. [PubMed: 20148260]
193. Nogi T, Levin M. Characterization of innexin gene expression and functional roles of gap-
junctional communication in planarian regeneration. Dev Biol. 287(2)2005; :314–35. [PubMed:
16243308]
194. Binggeli R, Weinstein R. Membrane potentials and sodium channels: hypotheses for growth
regulation and cancer formation based on changes in sodium channels and gap junctions. J Theor
Biol. 1231986; :377-401. [PubMed: 2443763]
195. MacFarlane SN, Sontheimer H. Changes in ion channel expression accompany cell cycle
progression of spinal cord astrocytes. Glia. 30(1)2000; :39–48. [PubMed: 10696143]
196. Rouzaire-Dubois B, Gerard V, Dubois JM. Involvement of K+ channels in the quercetin-induced
inhibition of neuroblastoma cell growth. Pflugers Arch. 423(3–4)1993; :202–5. [PubMed:
8321622]
197. Wonderlin WF, Strobl JS. Potassium channels, proliferation and G1 progression. J Membr Biol.
154(2)1996; :91-107. [PubMed: 8929284]
198. Cone CD. The role of the surface electrical transmembrane potential in normal and malignant
mitogenesis. Ann NY Acad Sci. 2381974; :420-35. [PubMed: 4613241]

177. Lobo D, Lobikin M, Levin M. Discovering novel phenotypes with automatically inferred dynamic
models: a partial melanocyte conversion in Xenopus. Sci Rep. 72017; :41339. [PubMed:
28128301]
178. García-Quismondo M, Levin M, Lobo D. Modeling regenerative processes with membrane
computing. Inf Sci. 3812017; :229-249.
179. Bessonov N, Levin M, Morozova N, Reinberg N, Tosenberger A, Volpert V. Target morphology
and cell memory: a model of regenerative pattern formation. Neural Regen Res. 10(12)2015; :
1901-5. [PubMed: 26889161]
180. Bessonov N, Levin M, Morozova N, Reinberg N, Tosenberger A, Volpert V. On a Model of
Pattern Regeneration Based on Cell Memory. PloS one. 10(2)2015; :e0118091. [PubMed:
25695252]
181. Tosenberger A, Bessonov N, Levin M, Reinberg N, Volpert V, Morozova N. A Conceptual Model
of Morphogenesis and Regeneration. Acta biotheoretica. 63(3)2015; :283–94. [PubMed:
25822060]
182. Pfeifer R, Iida F, Lungarella M. Cognition from the bottom up: on biological inspiration, body
morphology, and soft materials. Trends Cogn Sci. 18(8)2014; :404-413. [PubMed: 24839893]
183. Zahedi K, Ay N. Quantifying Morphological Computation. Entropy-Switz. 15(5)2013; :1887.
184. Wilson MZ, Ravindran PT, Lim WA, Toettcher JE. Tracing Information Flow from Erk to Target
Gene Induction Reveals Mechanisms of Dynamic and Combinatorial Control. Mol Cell.
67(5)2017; :757-769e5. [PubMed: 28826673]
185. Bugaj LJ, O'Donoghue GP, Lim WA. Interrogating cellular perception and decision making with
optogenetic tools. J Cell Biol. 216(1)2017; :25-28. [PubMed: 28003330]
186. Mitchell A, Lim W. Cellular perception and misperception: Internal models for decision-making
shaped by evolutionary experience. Bioessays. 38(9)2016; :845–9. [PubMed: 27461864]
187. Levin M. Endogenous bioelectrical networks store non-genetic patterning information during
development and regeneration. The Journal of Physiology. 592(11)2014; :2295–2305. [PubMed:
24882814]
188. Noble D. A theory of biological relativity: no privileged level of causation. Interface Focus.
2(1)2012; :55-64. [PubMed: 23386960]
189. Pagan OR, Baker D, Deats S, Montgomery E, Tenaglia M, Randolph C, Kotturu D, Tallarida C,
Bach D, Wilk G, Rawls S, Raffa RB. Planarians in pharmacology: parthenolide is a specific
behavioral antagonist of cocaine in the planarian Girardia tigrina. The International journal of
developmental biology. 56(1-3)2012; :193–6. [PubMed: 22451007]
190. Mcculloch WS, Pitts W. A Logical Calculus of the Ideas Immanent in Nervous Activity. Bulletin
of Mathematical Biology. 52(1–2)1990; :99–115. [PubMed: 2185863]
191. Friston K, Ao P. Free energy, value, and attractors. Comput Math Methods Med. 20122012; :
937860. [PubMed: 22229042]
192. Friston KJ, Daunizeau J, Kilner J, Kiebel SJ. Action and behavior: a free-energy formulation.
Biological cybernetics. 102(3)2010; :227–60. [PubMed: 20148260]
193. Nogi T, Levin M. Characterization of innexin gene expression and functional roles of gap-
junctional communication in planarian regeneration. Dev Biol. 287(2)2005; :314–35. [PubMed:
16243308]
194. Binggeli R, Weinstein R. Membrane potentials and sodium channels: hypotheses for growth
regulation and cancer formation based on changes in sodium channels and gap junctions. J Theor
Biol. 1231986; :377-401. [PubMed: 2443763]
195. MacFarlane SN, Sontheimer H. Changes in ion channel expression accompany cell cycle
progression of spinal cord astrocytes. Glia. 30(1)2000; :39–48. [PubMed: 10696143]
196. Rouzaire-Dubois B, Gerard V, Dubois JM. Involvement of K+ channels in the quercetin-induced
inhibition of neuroblastoma cell growth. Pflugers Arch. 423(3–4)1993; :202–5. [PubMed:
8321622]
197. Wonderlin WF, Strobl JS. Potassium channels, proliferation and G1 progression. J Membr Biol.
154(2)1996; :91-107. [PubMed: 8929284]
198. Cone CD. The role of the surface electrical transmembrane potential in normal and malignant
mitogenesis. Ann NY Acad Sci. 2381974; :420-35. [PubMed: 4613241]
199. Arcangeli A, Carla M, Bene M, Becchetti A, Wanke E, Olivotto M. Polar/apolar compounds
induce leukemia cell differentiation by modulating cell-surface potential. PNAS. 901993; :5858-
5862. [PubMed: 8516337]
200. Liebau S, Propper C, Bockers T, Lehmann-Horn F, Storch A, Grissmer S, Wittekindt OH.
Selective blockage of Kv1.3 and Kv3.1 channels increases neural progenitor cell proliferation. J
Neurochem. 99(2)2006; :426-37. [PubMed: 17029597]
201. Morokuma J, Blackiston D, Adams DS, Seebohm G, Trimmer B, Levin M. Modulation of
potassium channel function confers a hyperproliferative invasive phenotype on embryonic stem
cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci US A. 105(43)2008; :16608–13. [PubMed: 18931301]
202. Cone CD, Cone CM. Induction of mitosis in mature neurons in central nervous system by
sustained depolarization. Science. 192(4235)1976; :155–8. [PubMed: 56781]
203. Cone CD Jr. Variation of the transmembrane potential level as a basic mechanism of mitosis
control. Oncology. 24(6)1970; :438–70. [PubMed: 5495918]
204. Cone CD. Unified theory on the basic mechanism of normal mitotic control and oncogenesis. J
Theor Biol. 30(1)1971; :151–81. [PubMed: 5555269]
205. Cone CD, Tongier M. Control of somatic cell mitosis by simulated changes in the transmembrane
potential level. Oncology. 25(2)1971; :168–82. [PubMed: 5148061]
206. Cone CD, Tongier M. Contact inhibition of division: involvement of the electrical transmembrane
potential. J Cell Physiol. 82(3)1973; :373–86. [PubMed: 4590237]
207. Stillwell EF, Cone CM, Cone CD. Stimulation of DNA synthesis in CNS neurones by sustained
depolarisation. Nat New Biol. 246(152)1973; :110-1. [PubMed: 4518935]
208. Wang L, Zhou P, Craig RW, Lu L. Protection from cell death by mcl-1 is mediated by membrane
hyperpolarization induced by K(+) channel activation. J Membr Biol. 172(2)1999; :113-20.
[PubMed: 10556359]
209. Lang F, Foller M, Lang KS, Lang PA, Ritter M, Gulbins E, Vereninov A, Huber SM. Ion channels
in cell proliferation and apoptotic cell death. J Membr Biol. 205(3)2005; :147–57. [PubMed:
16362503]
210. Miki T, Iwanaga T, Nagashima K, Ihara Y, Seino S. Roles of ATP-sensitive K+ channels in cell
survival and differentiation in the endocrine pancreas. Diabetes. 50(Suppl 1)2001; :S48-51.
[PubMed: 11272201]
211. Lauritzen I, Zanzouri M, Honore E, Duprat F, Ehrengruber MU, Lazdunski M, Patel AJ. K+-
dependent cerebellar granule neuron apoptosis. Role of task leak K+ channels. J Biol Chem.
278(34)2003; :32068–76. [PubMed: 12783883]
212. Shen YA, Lin CH, Chi WH, Wang CY, Hsieh YT, Wei YH, Chen YJ. Resveratrol Impedes the
Stemness, Epithelial-Mesenchymal Transition, and Metabolic Reprogramming of Cancer Stem
Cells in Nasopharyngeal Carcinoma through p53 Activation. Evidence-based complementary and
alternative medicine: eCAM. 20132013; :590393. [PubMed: 23737838]
213. Anderson JD. GALVANOTAXIS OF SLIME MOLD. J Gen Physiol. 35(1)1951; :1–16. [PubMed:
14873916]
214. Hyman L, Bellamy A. Studies on the correlation between metabolic gradients, electrical
gradients, and galvanotaxis I. Biological Bulletin. XLIII(5)1922; :313–347.
215. Stump RF, Robinson KR. Xenopus neural crest cell migration in an applied electrical field. J Cell
Biol. 97(4)1983; :1226–1233. [PubMed: 6619192]
216. Zhao M, McCaig CD, Agius-Fernandez A, Forrester JV, Araki-Sasaki K. Human corneal
epithelial cells reorient and migrate cathodally in a small applied electric field. Curr Eye Res.
16(10)1997; :973–84. [PubMed: 9330848]
217. Pullar CE, Isseroff RR. Cyclic AMP mediates keratinocyte directional migration in an electric
field. J Cell Sci. 118(Pt 9)2005; :2023-34. [PubMed: 15840650]
218. Schwab A. Function and spatial distribution of ion channels and transporters in cell migration.
Am J Physiol Renal Physiol. 280(5)2001; :F739–47. [PubMed: 11292615]
219. Schwab A, Gabriel K, Finsterwalder F, Folprecht G, Greger R, Kramer A, Oberleithner H.
Polarized ion transport during migration of transformed Madin-Darby canine kidney cells.
Pflugers Arch. 430(5)1995; :802-7. [PubMed: 7478936]
220. Yan X, Han J, Zhang Z, Wang J, Cheng Q, Gao K, Ni Y, Wang Y. Lung cancer A549 cells migrate
directionally in DC electric fields with polarized and activated EGFRs. Bioelectromagnetics.
30(1)2009; :29-35. [PubMed: 18618607]
221. Fraser SP, Diss JK, Chioni AM, Mycielska ME, Pan H, Yamaci RF, Pani F, Siwy Z, Krasowska
M, Grzywna Z, Brackenbury WJ, Theodorou D, Koyuturk M, Kaya H, Battaloglu E, De Bella
MT, Slade MJ, Tolhurst R, Palmieri C, Jiang J, Latchman DS, Coombes RC, Djamgoz MB.
Voltage-gated sodium channel expression and potentiation of human breast cancer metastasis.
Clin Cancer Res. 11(15)2005; :5381–9. [PubMed: 16061851]
222. McCaig CD, Rajnicek AM, Song B, Zhao M. Controlling cell behavior electrically: current views
and future potential. Physiol Rev. 85(3)2005; :943–78. [PubMed: 15987799]
223. Hinard V, Belin D, Konig S, Bader CR, Bernheim L. Initiation of human myoblast differentiation
via dephosphorylation of Kir2.1 K+ channels at tyrosine 242. Development. 135(5)2008; :859–
67. [PubMed: 18216177]
224. Konig S, Beguet A, Bader CR, Bernheim L. The calcineurin pathway links hyperpolarization
(Kir2.1)-induced Ca2+ signals to human myoblast differentiation and fusion. Development.
133(16)2006; :3107–14. [PubMed: 16831831]
225. Lange C, Prenninger S, Knuckles P, Taylor V, Levin M, Calegari F. The H(+) vacuolar ATPase
maintains neural stem cells in the developing mouse cortex. Stem cells and development.
20(5)2011; :843-50. [PubMed: 21126173]
226. Sundelacruz S, Levin M, Kaplan DL. Membrane potential controls adipogenic and osteogenic
differentiation of mesenchymal stem cells. PLoS One. 3(11)2008; :e3737. [PubMed: 19011685]
227. Barth LG, Barth LJ. Ionic regulation of embryonic induction and cell differentiation in Rana
pipiens. Dev Biol. 39(1)1974; :1-22. [PubMed: 4545813]
228. Barth LJ, Barth LG. Effect of the potassium ion on induction of notochord from gastrula ectoderm
of Rana pipiens. Biol Bull. 146(3)1974; :313–25. [PubMed: 4546790]
229. Harrington DB, Becker RO. Electrical stimulation of RNA and protein synthesis in the frog
erythrocyte. Exp Cell Res. 76(1)1973; :95–8. [PubMed: 4118777]
230. Jaffe, L. Developmental currents, voltages, and gradients. In: Subtelny, S, editorDevelopmental
Order: its origin and regulation. Alan R Liss; New York: 1982. 183-215.
231. Minc N, Chang F. Electrical control of cell polarization in the fission yeast Schizosaccharomyces
pombe. Curr Biol. 20(8)2010; :710–6. [PubMed: 20362451]
232. Shi R, Borgens RB. Three-dimensional gradients of voltage during development of the nervous
system as invisible coordinates for the establishment of embryonic pattern. Dev Dyn.
202(2)1995; :101-14. [PubMed: 7734729]
233. Pan L, Borgens RB. Perpendicular organization of sympathetic neurons within a required
physiological voltage. Exp Neurol. 222(1)2010; :161–4. [PubMed: 20005224]
234. Stern C. Experimental reversal of polarity in chick embryo epiblast sheets in vitro. Exp Cell Res.
1401982; :468-471. [PubMed: 6288421]
235. Hotary KB, Robinson KR. Evidence of a role for endogenous electrical fields in chick embryo
development. Development. 114(4)1992; :985–96. [PubMed: 1618158]
236. Borgens RB, Shi R. Uncoupling histogenesis from morphogenesis in the vertebrate embryo by
collapse of the transneural tube potential. Developmental Dynamics. 203(4)1995; :456–67.
[PubMed: 7496037]
237. Adams DS, Robinson KR, Fukumoto T, Yuan S, Albertson RC, Yelick P, Kuo L, McSweeney M,
Levin M. Early, H+-V-ATPase-dependent proton flux is necessary for consistent left-right
patterning of non-mammalian vertebrates. Development. 1332006; :1657–1671. [PubMed:
16554361]
238. Woodruff RI. Calmodulin transit via gap junctions is reduced in the absence of an electric field. J
Insect Physiol. 51(8)2005; :843-52. [PubMed: 15935371]
239. Kurtz I, Schrank AR. Bioelectrical properties of intact and regenerating earthworms Eisenia
foetida. Physiol Zool. 281955; :322-330.
240. Uzman JA, Patil S, Uzgare AR, Sater AK. The role of intracellular alkalinization in the
establishment of anterior neural fate in Xenopus. Developmental Biology. 193(1)1998; :10–20.
[PubMed: 9466884]
241. Bentrup F, Sandan T, Jaffe L. Induction of Polarity in Fucus Eggs by Potassium Ion Gradients.
Protoplasma. 64(3)1967; :254.
242. Novák B, Bentrup FW. An electrophysiological study of regeneration in Acetabularia
Mediterranea. Planta. 1081972; :227-244. [PubMed: 24473856]
243. Novak B, Sirnoval C. Inhibition of regeneration of Acetabularia mediterranea enucleated posterior
stalk segments by electrical isolation. Plant Science Letters. 51975; :183-188.
244. Borgens RB. The role of natural and applied electric fields in neuronal regeneration and
development. Progress in Clinical & Biological Research. 2101986; :239–50. [PubMed:
3960913]
245. Borgens RB, Blight AR, Murphy DJ. Axonal regeneration in spinal cord injury: a perspective and
new technique. Journal of Comparative Neurology. 250(2)1986; :157–67. [PubMed: 3745509]
246. Borgens RB, Blight AR, McGinnis ME. Functional recovery after spinal cord hemisection in
guinea pigs: the effects of applied electric fields. J Comp Neurol. 296(4)1990; :634-53.
[PubMed: 2358555]
247. Vandenberg LN, Morrie RD, Adams DS. V-ATPase-dependent ectodermal voltage and pH
regionalization are required for craniofacial morphogenesis. Dev Dyn. 240(8)2011; :1889–904.
[PubMed: 21761475]
248. Pai VP, Aw S, Shomrat T, Lemire JM, Levin M. Transmembrane voltage potential controls
embryonic eye patterning in Xenopus laevis. Development. 139(2)2012; :313–23. [PubMed:
22159581]
249. Rigas S, Debrosses G, Haralampidis K, Vicente-Agullo F, Feldmann KA, Grabov A, Dolan L,
Hatzopoulos P. TRH1 encodes a potassium transporter required for tip growth in Arabidopsis
root hairs. The Plant cell. 13(1)2001; :139–51. [PubMed: 11158535]
250. Dahal GR, Rawson J, Gassaway B, Kwok B, Tong Y, Ptacek LJ, Bates E. An inwardly rectifying
K+ channel is required for patterning. Development. 139(19)2012; :3653–64. [PubMed:
22949619]
251. Villanueva S, Burgos J, Lopez-Cayuqueo KI, Lai KM, Valenzuela DM, Cid LP, Sepulveda FV.
Cleft Palate, Moderate Lung Developmental Retardation and Early Postnatal Lethality in Mice
Deficient in the Kir7.1 Inwardly Rectifying K+ Channel. PloS one. 10(9)2015; :e0139284.
[PubMed: 26402555]
252. Simons M, Gault WJ, Gotthardt D, Rohatgi R, Klein TJ, Shao Y, Lee HJ, Wu AL, Fang Y, Satlin
LM, Dow JT, Chen J, Zheng J, Boutros M, Mlodzik M. Electrochemical cues regulate assembly
of the Frizzled/Dishevelled complex at the plasma membrane during planar epithelial
polarization. Nat Cell Biol. 11(3)2009; :286–94. [PubMed: 19234454]
253. Hermle T, Saltukoglu D, Grunewald J, Walz G, Simons M. Regulation of Frizzled-dependent
planar polarity signaling by a V-ATPase subunit. Curr Biol. 20(14)2010; :1269–76. [PubMed:
20579879]
254. Muller C, Maeso I, Wittbrodt J, Martinez-Morales JR. The medaka mutation tintachina sheds
light on the evolution of V-ATPase B subunits in vertebrates. Sci Rep. 32013; :3217. [PubMed:
24225653]
255. Borthwick KJ, Kandemir N, Topaloglu R, Kornak U, Bakkaloglu A, Yordam N, Ozen S, Mocan
H, Shah GN, Sly WS, Karet FE. A phenocopy of CAII deficiency: a novel genetic explanation
for inherited infantile osteopetrosis with distal renal tubular acidosis. Journal of medical genetics.
40(2)2003; :115–21. [PubMed: 12566520]
256. Zheng, J, Trudeau, MC. Handbook of ion channels. CRC Press; Boca Raton: 2015.
257. Duque A, Gazula VR, Kaczmarek LK. Expression of Kv1.3 potassium channels regulates density
of cortical interneurons. Developmental neurobiology. 73(11)2013; :841-55. [PubMed:
23821603]
258. Christensen AH, Chatelain FC, Huttner IG, Olesen MS, Soka M, Feliciangeli S, Horvat C,
Santiago CF, Vandenberg JI, Schmitt N, Olesen SP, Lesage F, Fatkin D. The two-pore domain
potassium channel, TWIK-1, has a role in the regulation of heart rate and atrial size. J Mol Cell
Cardiol. 2016
259. Kortum F, Caputo V, Bauer CK, Stella L, Ciolfi A, Alawi M, Bocchinfuso G, Flex E, Paolacci S,
Dentici ML, Grammatico P, Korenke GC, Leuzzi V, Mowat D, Nair LD, Nguyen TT, Thierry P,
White SM, Dallapiccola B, Pizzuti A, Campeau PM, Tartaglia M, Kutsche K. Mutations in
KCNH1 and ATP6V1B2 cause Zimmermann-Laband syndrome. Nat Genet. 2015
260. Simons C, Rash LD, Crawford J, Ma L, Cristofori-Armstrong B, Miller D, Ru K, Baillie GJ,
Alanay Y, Jacquinet A, Debray FG, Verloes A, Shen J, Yesil G, Guler S, Yuksel A, Cleary JG,
Grimmond SM, McGaughran J, King GF, Gabbett MT, Taft RJ. Mutations in the voltage-gated
potassium channel gene KCNH1 cause Temple-Baraitser syndrome and epilepsy. Nat Genet.
47(1)2015; :73–7. [PubMed: 25420144]
261. Labonne JD, Graves TD, Shen Y, Jones JR, Kong IK, Layman LC, Kim HG. A microdeletion at
Xq22.2 implicates a glycine receptor GLRA4 involved in intellectual disability, behavioral
problems and craniofacial anomalies. BMC Neurol. 162016; :132. [PubMed: 27506666]
262. Petersson S, Persson AS, Johansen JE, Ingvar M, Nilsson J, Klement G, Arhem P, Schalling M,
Lavebratt C. Truncation of the Shaker-like voltage-gated potassium channel, Kv1.1, causes
megencephaly. Eur J Neurosci. 18(12)2003; :3231–40. [PubMed: 14686897]
263. Sharma V, Roy S, Sekler I, O'Halloran DM. The NCLX-type Na+/Ca2+ Exchanger NCX-9 Is
Required for Patterning of Neural Circuits in Caenorhabditis elegans. J Biol Chem.
292(13)2017; :5364-5377. [PubMed: 28196860]
264. Hiraki Y, Miyatake S, Hayashidani M, Nishimura Y, Matsuura H, Kamada M, Kawagoe T, Yunoki
K, Okamoto N, Yofune H, Nakashima M, Tsurusaki Y, Satisu H, Murakami A, Miyake N,
Nishimura G, Matsumoto N. Aortic aneurysm and craniosynostosis in a family with Cantu
syndrome. American journal of medical genetics. Part A. 164A(1)2014; :231-6. [PubMed:
24352916]
265. Cooper PE, Reutter H, Woelfle J, Engels H, Grange DK, van Haaften G, van Bon BW, Hoischen
A, Nichols CG. Cantu syndrome resulting from activating mutation in the KCNJ8 gene. Hum
Mutat. 35(7)2014; :809–13. [PubMed: 24700710]
266. Brownstein CA, Towne MC, Luquette LJ, Harris DJ, Marinakis NS, Meinecke P, Kutsche K,
Campeau PM, Yu TW, Margulies DM, Agrawal PB, Beggs AH. Mutation of KCNJ8 in a patient
with Cantu syndrome with unique vascular abnormalities - support for the role of K(ATP)
channels in this condition. European journal of medical genetics. 56(12)2013; :678–82.
[PubMed: 24176758]
267. Chong JX, McMillin MJ, Shively KM, Beck AE, Marvin CT, Armenteros JR, Buckingham KJ,
Nkinsi NT, Boyle EA, Berry MN, Bocian M, Foulds N, Uzielli ML, Haldeman-Englert C,
Hennekam RC, Kaplan P, Kline AD, Mercer CL, Nowaczyk MJ, Klein Wassink-Ruiter JS,
McPherson EW, Moreno RA, Scheuerle AE, Shashi V, Stevens CA, Carey JC, Monteil A, Lory P,
Tabor HK, Smith JD, Shendure J, Nickerson DA, Bamshad MJ. De novo mutations in NALCN
cause a syndrome characterized by congenital contractures of the limbs and face, hypotonia and
developmental delay. Am J Hum Genet. 96(3)2015; :462–73. [PubMed: 25683120]
268. Uzun S, Gokce S, Wagner K. Cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator gene
mutations in infertile males with congenital bilateral absence of the vas deferens. The Tohoku
journal of experimental medicine. 207(4)2005; :279–85. [PubMed: 16272798]
269. Wilschanski M, Dupuis A, Ellis L, Jarvi K, Zielenski J, Tullis E, Martin S, Corey M, Tsui LC,
Durie P. Mutations in the cystic fibrosis transmembrane regulator gene and in vivo transepithelial
potentials. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 174(7)2006; :787–94. [PubMed: 16840743]
270. Veale EL, Hassan M, Walsh Y, Al-Moubarak E, Mathie A. Recovery of current through mutated
TASK3 potassium channels underlying Birk Barel syndrome. Mol Pharmacol. 85(3)2014; :397-
407. [PubMed: 24342771]
271. Barel O, Shalev SA, Ofir R, Cohen A, Zlotogora J, Shorer Z, Mazor G, Finer G, Khateeb S,
Zilberberg N, Birk OS. Maternally inherited Birk Barel mental retardation dysmorphism
syndrome caused by a mutation in the genomically imprinted potassium channel KCNK9. Am J
Hum Genet. 83(2)2008; :193–9. [PubMed: 18678320]
272. Gloyn AL, Pearson ER, Antcliff JF, Proks P, Bruining GJ, Slingerland AS, Howard N, Srinivasan
S, Silva JM, Molnes J, Edghill EL, Frayling TM, Temple IK, Mackay D, Shield JP, Sumnik Z,
van Rhijn A, Wales JK, Clark P, Gorman S, Aisenberg J, Ellard S, Njolstad PR, Ashcroft FM,
Hattersley AT. Activating mutations in the gene encoding the ATP-sensitive potassium-channel
subunit Kir6.2 and permanent neonatal diabetes. The New England journal of medicine.
350(18)2004; :1838–49. [PubMed: 15115830]

260. Simons C, Rash LD, Crawford J, Ma L, Cristofori-Armstrong B, Miller D, Ru K, Baillie GJ, Alanay Y, Jacquinet A, Debray FG, Verloes A, Shen J, Yesil G, Guler S, Yuksel A, Cleary JG, Grimmond SM, McGaughran J, King GF, Gabbett MT, Taft RJ. Mutations in the voltage-gated potassium channel gene KCNH1 cause Temple-Baraitser syndrome and epilepsy. Nat Genet. 47(1)2015; :73–7. [PubMed: 25420144]
261. Labonne JD, Graves TD, Shen Y, Jones JR, Kong IK, Layman LC, Kim HG. A microdeletion at Xq22.2 implicates a glycine receptor GLRA4 involved in intellectual disability, behavioral problems and craniofacial anomalies. BMC Neurol. 162016; :132. [PubMed: 27506666]
262. Petersson S, Persson AS, Johansen JE, Ingvar M, Nilsson J, Klement G, Arhem P, Schalling M, Lavebratt C. Truncation of the Shaker-like voltage-gated potassium channel, Kv1.1, causes megencephaly. Eur J Neurosci. 18(12)2003; :3231–40. [PubMed: 14686897]
263. Sharma V, Roy S, Sekler I, O'Halloran DM. The NCLX-type Na+/Ca2+ Exchanger NCX-9 Is Required for Patterning of Neural Circuits in Caenorhabditis elegans. J Biol Chem. 292(13)2017; :5364-5377. [PubMed: 28196860]
264. Hiraki Y, Miyatake S, Hayashidani M, Nishimura Y, Matsuura H, Kamada M, Kawagoe T, Yunoki K, Okamoto N, Yofune H, Nakashima M, Tsurusaki Y, Satisu H, Murakami A, Miyake N, Nishimura G, Matsumoto N. Aortic aneurysm and craniosynostosis in a family with Cantu syndrome. American journal of medical genetics. Part A. 164A(1)2014; :231-6. [PubMed: 24352916]
265. Cooper PE, Reutter H, Woelfle J, Engels H, Grange DK, van Haaften G, van Bon BW, Hoischen A, Nichols CG. Cantu syndrome resulting from activating mutation in the KCNJ8 gene. Hum Mutat. 35(7)2014; :809–13. [PubMed: 24700710]
266. Brownstein CA, Towne MC, Luquette LJ, Harris DJ, Marinakis NS, Meinecke P, Kutsche K, Campeau PM, Yu TW, Margulies DM, Agrawal PB, Beggs AH. Mutation of KCNJ8 in a patient with Cantu syndrome with unique vascular abnormalities - support for the role of K(ATP) channels in this condition. European journal of medical genetics. 56(12)2013; :678–82. [PubMed: 24176758]
267. Chong JX, McMillin MJ, Shively KM, Beck AE, Marvin CT, Armenteros JR, Buckingham KJ, Nkinsi NT, Boyle EA, Berry MN, Bocian M, Foulds N, Uzielli ML, Haldeman-Englert C, Hennekam RC, Kaplan P, Kline AD, Mercer CL, Nowaczyk MJ, Klein Wassink-Ruiter JS, McPherson EW, Moreno RA, Scheuerle AE, Shashi V, Stevens CA, Carey JC, Monteil A, Lory P, Tabor HK, Smith JD, Shendure J, Nickerson DA, Bamshad MJ. De novo mutations in NALCN cause a syndrome characterized by congenital contractures of the limbs and face, hypotonia and developmental delay. Am J Hum Genet. 96(3)2015; :462–73. [PubMed: 25683120]
268. Uzun S, Gokce S, Wagner K. Cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator gene mutations in infertile males with congenital bilateral absence of the vas deferens. The Tohoku journal of experimental medicine. 207(4)2005; :279–85. [PubMed: 16272798]
269. Wilschanski M, Dupuis A, Ellis L, Jarvi K, Zielenski J, Tullis E, Martin S, Corey M, Tsui LC, Durie P. Mutations in the cystic fibrosis transmembrane regulator gene and in vivo transepithelial potentials. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 174(7)2006; :787–94. [PubMed: 16840743]
270. Veale EL, Hassan M, Walsh Y, Al-Moubarak E, Mathie A. Recovery of current through mutated TASK3 potassium channels underlying Birk Barel syndrome. Mol Pharmacol. 85(3)2014; :397- 407. [PubMed: 24342771]
271. Barel O, Shalev SA, Ofir R, Cohen A, Zlotogora J, Shorer Z, Mazor G, Finer G, Khateeb S, Zilberberg N, Birk OS. Maternally inherited Birk Barel mental retardation dysmorphism syndrome caused by a mutation in the genomically imprinted potassium channel KCNK9. Am J Hum Genet. 83(2)2008; :193–9. [PubMed: 18678320]
272. Gloyn AL, Pearson ER, Antcliff JF, Proks P, Bruining GJ, Slingerland AS, Howard N, Srinivasan S, Silva JM, Molnes J, Edghill EL, Frayling TM, Temple IK, Mackay D, Shield JP, Sumnik Z, van Rhijn A, Wales JK, Clark P, Gorman S, Aisenberg J, Ellard S, Njolstad PR, Ashcroft FM, Hattersley AT. Activating mutations in the gene encoding the ATP-sensitive potassium-channel subunit Kir6.2 and permanent neonatal diabetes. The New England journal of medicine. 350(18)2004; :1838–49. [PubMed: 15115830]
273. Lee MP, Ravenel JD, Hu RJ, Lustig LR, Tomaselli G, Berger RD, Brandenburg SA, Litzi TJ, Bunton TE, Limb C, Francis H, Gorelikow M, Gu H, Washington K, Argani P, Goldenring JR, Coffey RJ, Feinberg AP. Targeted disruption of the Kvlqt1 gene causes deafness and gastric hyperplasia in mice. J Clin Invest. 106(12)2000; :1447–55. [PubMed: 11120752]
274. Weksberg R, Nishikawa J, Caluseriu O, Fei YL, Shuman C, Wei C, Steele L, Cameron J, Smith A, Ambus I, Li M, Ray PN, Sadowski P, Squire J. Tumor development in the Beckwith- Wiedemann syndrome is associated with a variety of constitutional molecular 11p15 alterations including imprinting defects of KCNQ1OT1. Hum Mol Genet. 10(26)2001; :2989–3000. [PubMed: 11751681]
275. Moore ES, Ward RE, Escobar LF, Carlin ME. Heterogeneity in Wiedemann-Beckwith syndrome: anthropometric evidence. Am J Med Genet. 90(4)2000; :283–90. [PubMed: 10710224]
276. Rivas A, Francis HW. Inner ear abnormalities in a Kenq1 (Kvlqt1) knockout mouse: a model of Jervell and Lange-Nielsen syndrome. Otol Neurotol. 26(3)2005; :415–24. [PubMed: 15891643]
277. Casimiro MC, Knollmann BC, Yamoah EN, Nie L, Vary JC Jr, Sirenko SG, Greene AE, Grinberg A, Huang SP, Ebert SN, Pfeifer K. Targeted point mutagenesis of mouse Kenq1: phenotypic analysis of mice with point mutations that cause Romano-Ward syndrome in humans. Genomics. 84(3)2004; :555-64. [PubMed: 15498462]
278. Chouabe C, Neyroud N, Guicheney P, Lazdunski M, Romey G, Barhanin J. Properties of KvLQT1 K+ channel mutations in Romano-Ward and Jervell and Lange-Nielsen inherited cardiac arrhythmias. Embo J. 16(17)1997; :5472–9. [PubMed: 9312006]
279. Bendahhou S, Donaldson MR, Plaster NM, Tristani-Firouzi M, Fu YH, Ptacek LJ. Defective potassium channel Kir2.1 trafficking underlies Andersen-Tawil syndrome. J Biol Chem. 278(51)2003; :51779-85. [PubMed: 14522976]
280. Yoon G, Oberoi S, Tristani-Firouzi M, Etheridge SP, Quitania L, Kramer JH, Miller BL, Fu YH, Ptacek LJ. Andersen-Tawil syndrome: prospective cohort analysis and expansion of the phenotype. Am J Med Genet A. 140(4)2006; :312-21. [PubMed: 16419128]
281. Culiat CT, Stubbs LJ, Woychik RP, Russell LB, Johnson DK, Rinchik EM. Deficiency of the beta 3 subunit of the type A gamma-aminobutyric acid receptor causes cleft palate in mice. Nat Genet. 11(3)1995; :344–6. [PubMed: 7581464]
282. Wee EL, Zimmerman EF. GABA uptake in embryonic palate mesenchymal cells of two mouse strains. Neurochem Res. 10(12)1985; :1673–88. [PubMed: 4088436]
283. Homanics GE, DeLorey TM, Firestone LL, Quinlan JJ, Handforth A, Harrison NL, Krasowski MD, Rick CE, Korpi ER, Makela R, Brilliant MH, Hagiwara N, Ferguson C, Snyder K, Olsen RW. Mice devoid of gamma-aminobutyrate type A receptor beta3 subunit have epilepsy, cleft palate, and hypersensitive behavior. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America. 94(8)1997; :4143–8. [PubMed: 9108119]
284. Rock JR, Futtner CR, Harfe BD. The transmembrane protein TMEM16A is required for normal development of the murine trachea. Dev Biol. 321(1)2008; :141–9. [PubMed: 18585372]
285. Rakic P, Sidman RL. Sequence of developmental abnormalities leading to granule cell deficit in cerebellar cortex of weaver mutant mice. The Journal of comparative neurology. 152(2)1973; : 103-32. [PubMed: 4128371]
286. Rakic P, Sidman RL. Weaver mutant mouse cerebellum: defective neuronal migration secondary to abnormality of Bergmann glia. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America. 70(1)1973; :240–4. [PubMed: 4509657]
287. Hatten ME, Liem RK, Mason CA. Weaver mouse cerebellar granule neurons fail to migrate on wild-type astroglial processes in vitro. The Journal of neuroscience: the official journal of the Society for Neuroscience. 6(9)1986; :2676-83. [PubMed: 3528411]
288. Patil N, Cox DR, Bhat D, Faham M, Myers RM, Peterson AS. A potassium channel mutation in weaver mice implicates membrane excitability in granule cell differentiation. Nat Genet. 11(2)1995; :126–9. [PubMed: 7550338]
289. Teng GQ, Zhao X, Lees-Miller JP, Quinn FR, Li P, Rancourt DE, London B, Cross JC, Duff HJ. Homozygous missense N629D hERG (KCNH2) potassium channel mutation causes developmental defects in the right ventricle and its outflow tract and embryonic lethality. Circ Res. 103(12)2008; :1483-91. [PubMed: 18948620]
290. Than BL, Goos JA, Sarver AL, O'Sullivan MG, Rod A, Starr TK, Fijneman RJ, Meijer GA, Zhao L, Zhang Y, Largaespada DA, Scott PM, Cormier RT. The role of KCNQ1 in mouse and human gastrointestinal cancers. Oncogene. 2013
291. Adams DS, Masi A, Levin M. H+ pump-dependent changes in membrane voltage are an early mechanism necessary and sufficient to induce Xenopus tail regeneration. Development. 134(7)2007; :1323-35. [PubMed: 17329365]
292. Monteiro J, Aires R, Becker JD, Jacinto A, Certal AC, Rodriguez-Leon J. V-ATPase Proton Pumping Activity Is Required for Adult Zebrafish Appendage Regeneration. PloS one. 9(3)2014; :e92594. [PubMed: 24671205]
293. Duboc V, Rottinger E, Lapraz F, Besnardeau L, Lepage T. Left-right asymmetry in the sea urchin embryo is regulated by nodal signaling on the right side. Dev Cell. 9(1)2005; :147–58. [PubMed: 15992548]
294. Iwashita M, Watanabe M, Ishii M, Chen T, Johnson SL, Kurachi Y, Okada N, Kondo S. Pigment Pattern in jaguar/obelix Zebrafish Is Caused by a Kir7.1 Mutation: Implications for the Regulation of Melanosome Movement. PLoS Genet. 2(11)2006; :e197. [PubMed: 17121467]
295. Tur J, Chapalamadugu KC, Padawer T, Badole SL, Kilfoil PJ 2nd, Bhatnagar A, Tipparaju SM. Deletion of Kvbeta1.1 subunit leads to electrical and haemodynamic changes causing cardiac hypertrophy in female murine hearts. Exp Physiol. 101(4)2016; :494–508. [PubMed: 27038296]
296. Chopra SS, Stroud DM, Watanabe H, Bennett JS, Burns CG, Wells KS, Yang T, Zhong TP, Roden DM. Voltage-gated sodium channels are required for heart development in zebrafish. Circ Res. 106(8)2010; :1342-50. [PubMed: 20339120]
297. Shu X, Cheng K, Patel N, Chen F, Joseph E, Tsai HJ, Chen JN. Na, K-ATPase is essential for embryonic heart development in the zebrafish. Development. 130(25)2003; :6165-73. [PubMed: 14602677]
[PAGE 32] Figure 1. Planarian regeneration: fundamental puzzles of pattern control
(A) Bar magnets illustrate a basic property of polarity re-scaling: having a North and South pole, a magnet can be cut into pieces and each piece reorganizes its polarity to likewise have a North and South pole by orientating small magnetic domains into large-scale axial patterning.
(A') Planarian's anterior-posterior (AP) axis likewise re-scales: every piece cut from a planarian (D. japonica shown here) regenerates a head and tail at the correct end.
(A") Common models of axial patterning postulate a chemical gradient that indicates positional information for cells along the AP axis. The ability of cells on either side of a bisection to develop distinct anatomical fates (head vs. tail), even though they began as adjacent neighbors with identical positional information (green circles), suggests the need for long-range communication across the fragment so that decisions at the wound could be made based on the rest of the fragment.
(B, C) For most metazoans, sexual reproduction results in Weissmann's barrier – somatic mutations (B) do not persist into the next generation (B΄). However, planaria such as D. japonica largely reproduce through fission; thus, mutations in neoblasts anywhere in the worm body (B") that do not kill the neoblast persist into the next generation upon fission (B ""). Within that individual (C), the progeny of the neoblast inherit the mutation(s), which spread throughout the body (C') and are propagated to both offspring of the next fission event (C"). This gives rise to a fundamental puzzle about the relationship between genetics and patterning: over hundreds of millions of years, planarian lineages have thus accumulated diverse mutations in their bodies; despite the resulting very messy genomes, planaria regenerate with 100% anatomical fidelity and offer no genetic lines of patterning mutants.
(D) A thought experiment involving two different species of flatworms with distinct head shapes, illustrates knowledge gaps in the field. If one of the worms is irradiated so that half of its neoblasts are killed (D'), and neoblasts from another worm type are injected into this host (D"), what kind of head shape will this hybrid worm regenerate after amputation (D")? Existing models do not make a prediction as to whether a dominant shape, a combination shape, or never-ending remodeling will result.
Panels B-C" were made by Jeremy Guay of Peregrine Creative. Panels D-D" are used with permission from [8].

spread throughout the body (C') and are propagated to both offspring of the next fission
event (C"). This gives rise to a fundamental puzzle about the relationship between genetics
and patterning: over hundreds of millions of years, planarian lineages have thus accumulated
diverse mutations in their bodies; despite the resulting very messy genomes, planaria
regenerate with 100% anatomical fidelity and offer no genetic lines of patterning mutants.
(D) A thought experiment involving two different species of flatworms with distinct head
shapes, illustrates knowledge gaps in the field. If one of the worms is irradiated so that half
of its neoblasts are killed (D'), and neoblasts from another worm type are injected into this
host (D"), what kind of head shape will this hybrid worm regenerate after amputation (D")?
Existing models do not make a prediction as to whether a dominant shape, a combination
shape, or never-ending remodeling will result.
Panels B-C" were made by Jeremy Guay of Peregrine Creative. Panels D-D" are used
with permission from [8].


Panels A, A' were created by Jeremy Guay of Peregrine Creative.


Figure 3. Bioelectrically-mediated changes of patterning in planaria
(A) D. japonica mid-fragments exhibit bioelectric gradients, with anterior ends' cellular
Vmem depolarized compared to those of posterior cells. This pattern can be detected [85] via
voltage-sensitive fluorescent dyes (A΄), and modified with ion channel drugs, which alter the
endogenous bioelectrical gradient toward bi- or no-head heteromorphoses respectively (A"),
demonstrating that the bioelectric pattern is instructive for large-scale anatomical polarity
along the AP axis [100, 132].
(B) G. dorotocephala planaria exhibit a characteristically distinct head shape, compared to
other species. (Β΄) When fragments of G. dorotocephala were briefly treated with a gap
junction blocker [124], they regenerated heads whose shapes matched those of other extant
species of planaria.
(C) The appearance of these head shapes in a single cohort of worms treated together was
stochastic, appearing at frequencies proportional to the evolutionary distance between the
species.
Panel A' was courtesy of Taisaku Nogi. Panels B–C used with permission from [124].


Figure 4. Permanent change to planarian target morphology: resetting bioelectrical pattern
memories
(A) Exposing planarian fragments to the gap junction blocker 1-octanol for three days
results in a permanent re-setting of the target morphology [193]. Trunk fragments of such
worms continue to regenerate as double-headed animals in perpetuity, in plain water. 1-
octanol is washed out of the worm tissues within 2-3 days (as shown by mass spectrometry),
this demonstrates transient physiological changes becoming consolidated as long-term
pattern memory, without genomic editing. The animals' target morphology can be re-set
back to normal by altering the bioelectric circuit back to a wild-type distribution, using ion
pump drugs such as SCH28080 (A΄).
(B) Animals that did not become double-headed after an initial exposure to 1-octanol are not
wild-type because when cut in plain water they give rise to the same percentage of double-
headed worms in each generation. Here shown as a state transition diagram with double-
headed worms always regenerating as double-headed (a terminal state) while cryptics
continue to generate double-headed worms at the same ratio (each arrow is labeled with the
reagent applied at regeneration and the percentage of outcomes).
(Β΄) Cryptic worms are identical to wild-type worms in their anatomy, expression of head
and tail marker, and stem cell distribution [132]. However, a uniform depolarization of
endogenous bioelectrical gradient reveals the difference between normal and cryptic
animals. This altered bioelectric distribution is the key functional component of the re-
writable pattern memory mediating the regenerative control.
(C) The same body can contain at least two diverse bioelectric patterns guiding future
growth: wild-type (permanent single1-headed) or cryptic (destabilized, stochastic). One way

[PAGE 37] Figure 4. Permanent change to planarian target morphology: resetting bioelectrical pattern
memories
(A) Exposing planarian fragments to the gap junction blocker 1-octanol for three days
results in a permanent re-setting of the target morphology [193]. Trunk fragments of such
worms continue to regenerate as double-headed animals in perpetuity, in plain water. 1-
octanol is washed out of the worm tissues within 2-3 days (as shown by mass spectrometry),
this demonstrates transient physiological changes becoming consolidated as long-term
pattern memory, without genomic editing. The animals' target morphology can be re-set
back to normal by altering the bioelectric circuit back to a wild-type distribution, using ion
pump drugs such as SCH28080 (A΄).
(B) Animals that did not become double-headed after an initial exposure to 1-octanol are not
wild-type because when cut in plain water they give rise to the same percentage of double-
headed worms in each generation. Here shown as a state transition diagram with double-
headed worms always regenerating as double-headed (a terminal state) while cryptics
continue to generate double-headed worms at the same ratio (each arrow is labeled with the
reagent applied at regeneration and the percentage of outcomes).
(Β΄) Cryptic worms are identical to wild-type worms in their anatomy, expression of head
and tail marker, and stem cell distribution [132]. However, a uniform depolarization of
endogenous bioelectrical gradient reveals the difference between normal and cryptic
animals. This altered bioelectric distribution is the key functional component of the re-
writable pattern memory mediating the regenerative control.
(C) The same body can contain at least two diverse bioelectric patterns guiding future
growth: wild-type (permanent single1-headed) or cryptic (destabilized, stochastic). One way
to understand stable, discrete anatomical outcomes emerging from bioelectric circuit activity
is as stable attractors in a morphospace defined by the voltage states of the two ends of the
body.
Panel C made by Jeremy Guay of Peregrine Creative.

[PAGE 39] Figure 5. Bioinformatics of shape, applied to planaria
(A, B) The continued development of knowledge in this field will require computational
tools going beyond bioinformatics of genes and proteins, to assist in development and
analysis of models. One effort, PlanForm [169], comprises over 1,000 experiments from the
literature, matching the functional manipulations performed (e.g., specific cuts, joins, RNAi,
bioelectric change; see B) and the resulting anatomical outcomes represented by a graph
notation (B').
(C) One recent application of artificial intelligence to discovery of regulator pathways [168]
used evolutionary selection over a population of biochemical models. Here shown as the
progressive reduction of error in the predictions of top candidate models at each generation.
(D) This process uncovered a gene regulatory network whose patterning properties matched
observed data on canonical pathways (a sample is shown in D').
Panels A-D' are used with permission from [168, 169].

[PAGE 41] Table 2
Experimental data implicating endogenous bioelectric signal roles in morphogenesis

Developmental Role | Species / model system | References
---|---|---
Cellular polarization (anatomical asymmetry of cell or epithelium) | Alga Fucus, yeast | [230, 231]
Migration of neurons and positional information | Chick, Amphibia | [232, 233]
Patterning in gastrulation, neurulation, and organogenesis | Chick, axolotl, frog | [90, 232, 234-237]
Directional transport of maternal components into the oocyte | Moth, Drosophila | 
Growth control and size determination | segmented worms | [238]
Neural differentiation | Xenopus embryo | [239]
Polarity during regeneration | Planaria, plants, and annelids | [225, 240]
Induction of limb and spinal cord regeneration | Amphibia | [55, 56, 80, 81, 100, 241-243]
Control of gene expression and anatomy in craniofacial patterning | Xenopus embryo | [244-246]
Induction of eye development | Xenopus embryo | [247]
[248]


[PAGE 42] Table 3
Ion channels and pumps proteins implicated in patterning by genetic screens

Protein | Morphogenetic role or LOF phenotype | Species | References
---|---|---|---
TRH1 K+ transporter | Root hair patterning | Arabidopsis | [249]
Kir2.1 potassium channel | Wing patterning | Drosophila | [250]
Kir7.1 K+ channel | Craniofacial patterning, lung development | Mouse | [251]
NHE2 Na+/H+ exchanger | Epithelial patterning | Drosophila | [252]
V-ATPase proton pump | Wing hair patterning, Pigmentation and brain patterning | Drosophila | [253, 254]
HCN1, Kv3.1 K+ channels | Craniofacial patterning | Medaka, Human | [255]
KCNC1 K+ channel | Forebrain patterning | Mouse | [256, 257]
TWIK-1 K+ channel (KCNK1) | Growth deficits | Mouse | [256]
KCNJ6 K+channel | Cardiac (atrial) size | Mouse | [258]
KCNH1 (hEAG1) K+ channel and ATP6V1B2 V- ATPase proton pump | Zimmermann-Laband and Temple-Baraitser syndrome -craniofacial and brain defects, dysplasia/ aplasia of nails of thumb and great toe. | Human | [96]
[259, 260]
GLRa4 chloride channel | Craniofacial anomalies | Human | [261]
KCNA1 potassium channel | Megencephaly | Mouse | [262]
NCX-9 (Na+/Ca++) exchanger | Neural patterning | C. Elegans | [263]
GLRa4 chloride channel | Craniofacial anomalies | Human | [261]
KCNJ8 K+ | Cantu syndrome - face, heart, skeleton, and brain defects | Human | [264-266]
NALCN (Na+ leak channel) | Freeman-Sheldon syndrome - limbs, face, brain | Human | [267]
CFTR chloride channel | Bilateral absence of vas deferens | Human | [268, 269]
KCNK9, TASK3 K+ channels | Birk-Barel Dysmorphism Syndrome - craniofacial defects | Human | [270, 271]
Kir6.2 K+ channel | Craniofacial defects | Human | [272]
KCNQ1 K+ channel (via epigenetic regulation) | Hypertrophy of tongue, liver, spleen, pancreas, kidneys, adrenals, genitalia - Beckwith- Wiedemann syndrome; craniofacial and limb defects | Human, Mouse | [273-275]
KCNQ1 K+ channel | Jervell and Lange-Nielsen syndrome - inner ear and limb | Human, mouse | [276-278]
Kir2.1 K+ channel (KNCJ2) | Andersen-Tawil syndrome - craniofacial, limb, ribs | Human, mouse | [250, 279, 280]
GABA-A receptor (chloride channel) | Angelman Syndrome -craniofacial (e.g., cleft palate) and hand patterning | Human, mouse | [281-283]
TMEM16A chloride channel | Tracheal morphogenesis | Mouse | [284]
Girk2 K+ channel | Cerebellar development defects | Mouse | [285-288]
KCNH2 K+ channel | Cardiac, craniofacial patterning defects | Mouse | [289]
KCNQ1 K+ channel | Abnormalities of rectum, pancreas, and stomach | Mouse | [290]
NaV1.2 | Muscle and nerve repair defects | Xenopus | [94]
Kir6.1 K+ channel | Eye patterning defects | Xenopus | [248]
V-ATPase ion pump | Left-right asymmetry defects, muscle and nerve repair | Xenopus, chick, zebrafish | [237, 291]
H,K-ATPase ion pump | Left-right asymmetry defects | Xenopus, sea urchin | [90, 292, 293]


[PAGE 43]
Protein | Morphogenetic role or LOF phenotype | Species | References
---|---|---|---
Kir7.1 K+ channel | Melanosome development defects | Zebrafish | [294]
Kv channels | Fin size regulation, heart size regulation | Zebrafish, mouse | [92, 295]
NaV 1.5, Na+/K+-ATPase | Cardiac morphogenesis | Zebrafish | [296, 297]