EARLY PATTERNING OF THE
LEFT/RIGHT AXIS

D.S. Adams and M. Levin
Cytokine Biology Department, The Forsyth Institute, and Department of Oral and
Developmental Biology, Harvard School of Dental Medicine, Boston,
Massachusetts 02115

[PAGE 1] INTRODUCTION

Vertebrates have a bilaterally symmetrical body plan, but this symmetry is broken by the consistently asymmetric placement of various internal organs such as the heart, liver, spleen, and gut, or the asymmetric development of paired organs (such as brain hemispheres and lungs). The establishment of left/right (LR) asymmetry raises a number of fascinating biological questions. Why does asymmetry exist at all? What are the implications of asymmetry for the normal structure and physiology of the heart, gut, and brain? Why are all normal individuals not only asymmetric, but asymmetric in the same direction (i.e., why a consistent bias and not a 50%/50% racemic population)? When, during evolution, did handed asymmetry appear, and were there true bilaterally symmetrical organisms prior to the invention of oriented asymmetry? Is it connected to chirality in lower forms (such as snail shell coiling and chirality in some plants)? At what developmental stages is asymmetry initiated in vertebrate embryos? How conserved are the molecular mechanisms establishing correct asymmetry in animals with drastically different modes of gastrulation? How can the left/right axis be consistently oriented with respect to the anterior-posterior and dorsoventral axes in the absence of any macroscopic feature of chemistry or physics that distinguishes left from right? None of these questions can be properly addressed until we have a detailed understanding, at the molecular, genetic, and biochemical levels, of the formation of biased asymmetry in embryos.

Whereas in most species all normal individuals are asymmetrical in the same direction, animals with complete mirror reversal of internal organs can arise (situs inversus totalis) and are otherwise phenotypically unimpaired. Thus, although it is possible to come up with plausible evolutionary reasons that organisms might be asymmetric in the first place (optimal packing, fluid dynamics, maximizing surface area of tubes, etc.), there is no obvious reason they should all be asymmetric to the same direction. It is, after all, much easier to imagine a developmental mechanism for generating asymmetry (such as positive feedback and amplification of stochastic biochemical differences) than for biasing it to a given direction.

Although mechanisms underlying anterior-posterior and dorsoventral asymmetry have been studied in detail with the advent of molecular genetics, the mechanistic basis for LR asymmetry was, until recently, completely unknown. However, within the last 10-15 years, significant advances in embryonic asymmetry have been made by a number of groups (Levin and Mercola 1998a; Burdine and Schier 2000; Mercola and Levin 2001; Yost 2001; Mercola 2003). Tables 1-3 summarize the molecular players in the LR pathway and show which ones are conserved among various model systems. Gene products in the LR pathway have been identified in forward and reverse genetics approaches (exemplified by the zebrafish mutants and Sonic Hedgehog, respectively), and almost all have roles in embryonic processes other than LR asymmetry. Although a few of the components have no known homology or function (such as INV), the remainder form a fairly diverse group of molecules including secreted signaling factors, regulators of ion flux, motor proteins, and transcription factors. Some are asymmetrically expressed at the level of mRNA or protein, whereas others appear to have no asymmetry with respect to their localization.

Conceptually, LR patterning is divided into three phases. In the final phase, individual organs utilize cell migration, differential proliferation, and other mechanisms to achieve asymmetries in their location or morphogenesis. Upstream of these processes lies a pathway of asymmetric genes: genes which are expressed in cell fields only on one side of the embryonic midline, and which propagate signals that dictate sidedness for the organs undergoing asymmetric morphogenesis. These cascades of asymmetric gene expression form the middle phase of LR patterning. However, for whichever asymmetric gene is at the top of the pathway, it is necessary to ask what determines its asymmetry. Thus, in the first phase of LR patterning, an as-yet-unknown mechanism must orient the LR axis with respect to the other two axes (Brown and Wolpert 1990).

The developmental timing of each phase differs among species, although asymmetric gene expression almost always begins at or shortly after gastrulation. The LR axis is probably specified after the anterior-posterior (AP) and dorsoventral (DV) axes, and is determined with respect to them (McCain and McClay 1994; Danos and Yost 1995). The timing of the initiation of LR asymmetry is particularly controversial. In the following text, we review the most important data on mechanisms of asymmetry elucidated in a number of model systems.

[PAGE 4] FISH

Flatfishes acquire a profound asymmetry in eye location (and scale/skin pigmentation) during metamorphosis from bilaterally symmetric larvae (Matsumoto and Seikai 1992; Okada et al. 2001; Hashimoto et al. 2002). Analysis of mutants in the zebrafish embryo has identified a number of loci which, when altered, cause aberrant LR patterning (Yost 1998), although some of these are likely to represent secondary LR effects of disrupted notochord or AP/DV patterning. In zebrafish, asymmetric markers such as lefty, nodal, and pitx2 exhibit well-conserved asymmetric expression during neurulation and somitogenesis (Cheng et al. 2000; Essner et al. 2000; Liang et al. 2000). Unfortunately, almost nothing is known about early, upstream mechanisms in this model system.

[PAGE 4] FROGS

Embryos of the frog *Xenopus laevis* are analogous to the fish and chick with respect to a number of asymmetrically expressed left-sided genes (e.g., Nodal, Lefty, and Pitx-2) that function after neurulation (Levin 2004b). Although the mechanisms that process LR information during gastrulation in amphibia are largely unknown, the *Xenopus* embryo has allowed discovery of a number of mechanisms that underlie asymmetry at the earliest stages known in any species. Experiments in *Xenopus* were the first to suggest that the LR axis might be established extremely early, and to be intimately linked with DV axis formation (Yost 1991). The DV axis is initiated by sperm entry during fertilization, followed by a cytoplasmic rotation during the first cell cycle, driven by a microtubule array at the vegetal cortex (Gerhart et al. 1989). Work from the Yost lab showed that embryos in which the microtubule array was blocked, but which were tilted manually to rescue the DV axis, exhibited laterality defects, suggesting that the LR axis may be dependent on the transient microtubule array during the first cell cycle. The microtubule-associated motor proteins kinesin and dynein have been linked with LR asymmetry in mammals (see below). The appearance of LR asymmetry between fertilization and the first cell division is also consistent with the recent work on ion fluxes and the appearance of asymmetric mRNA and 14-3-3 protein localization during early cleavage (Levin et al. 2002; Bunney et al. 2003).


[PAGE 4] Syndecans

Localized perturbation of a small patch of extracellular matrix (ECM) by microsurgery, as well as global perturbation of the ECM by microinjection of Arg-Gly-Asp peptides or heparinase into the blastocoel, resulted in randomization of LR asymmetry. This work provided the first molecular entry point into LR asymmetry and suggested that the ECM participated in transfer of LR information in development. Inhibition of proteoglycan synthesis with the drug p-nitrophenyl-B-D-xylopyranoside prevents heart looping in *Xenopus* (Yost 1990). The sensitivity window was between stages 12 and 15—just after gastrulation.

On the basis of the proposal that heparan sulfate proteoglycans (HSPGs) or the ECM on the basal surface of the ectoderm transmits LR information to mesodermal primordia during gastrulation (Yost 1992), Teel and Yost examined the roles of the syndecan family; syndecan-1 and -2 are maternally expressed HSPGs specifically located in the animal cap ectoderm (Teel and Yost 1996). Using dominant-negative and loss-of-function approaches, it was shown that syndecan-2 is involved in LR asymmetry (Kramer and Yost 2002) in *Xenopus*. A cytoplasmic domain of syndecan-2 is phosphorylated in cells on the right but not the left half of the frog embryo during gastrulation. Moreover, they showed that attachment of multiple heparan sulfate glycosaminoglycans on syndecan-2 and functional interaction of these sites with the cytoplasmic domain are an obligate part of LR patterning during gastrulation, immediately prior to the migration of mesoderm across ectoderm. Kramer and Yost also presented biochemical data on the direct interaction of syndecan-2 with Vg1, suggesting that these two molecules function together during LR patterning at gastrulation.

[PAGE 4] Vg1 and the "Coordinator"

Another key finding in *Xenopus* was the discovery of an experimental perturbation that can produce almost full situs inversus; this is especially interesting, since almost every other reported manipulation results in heterotaxia—an independent randomization of situs and not full reversal (or loss of asymmetry). The active form of Vg1, a TGF-β family member, can almost completely invert the LR axis when misexpressed on the right side (R3 blastomere) of a *Xenopus* embryo (Hyatt et al. 1996; Hyatt and Yost 1998). This can be interpreted as signifying that Vg1 normally acts in descendants of the L3 blastomere, which contribute to the left lateral plate mesoderm, and the model suggests signaling through ALK2 and mutual antagonism with BMP on the right side of the embryo (Ramsdell and Yost 1999). Axial inversion is specific to the activated Vg1, as it cannot be mimicked by Activin. Although these data are consistent with an early LR pattern in the pre-gastrula-stage *Xenopus* embryo, the precise timing remains uncertain, since the persistence of the injected mRNA to later stages raises the possibility that the injected Vg1 persists in the embryo and mimics a later signal. Confirmation of the role of endogenous Vg1 in this process remains uncertain pending characterization of processed, endogenous Vg1 in early *Xenopus* embryos (and especially, asymmetries therein).


[PAGE 5] Gap Junctional Communication

Gap junctions are channels connecting adjacent cells which allow the direct transfer of small molecule signals. The cell biology of gap junctions has been described in several excellent recent reviews (Falk 2000), and gap junctional flow is involved in a number of important patterning events in embryonic development and tumor progression (Lo 1996; Levin 2001). Briefly, the most frequently studied gap junction channel is formed by the assembly and docking of hexamers of proteins from the connexin family (one hexamer in each of two adjacent cell membranes). Functional gap junctional communication (GJC) is dependent on the existence of compatible hemichannels on the cells' surfaces, the permeability of the hemichannels to the substance, and the open status of the gap junction.

On the basis of a report that several unrelated patients with viscero-atrial heterotaxia contain potential mutations within Connexin43 (Britz-Cunningham et al. 1995), and data from frog embryos that indicated asymmetric patterns of GJC in early blastomeres (Guthrie 1984; Guthrie et al. 1988), Levin and Mercola (1998b) tested the hypothesis that gap junctional paths are a mechanism by which LR information is communicated across large cell fields. *Xenopus* embryos at early cleavage stages were shown to contain a junctional path across the dorsal blastomeres, and a zone of junctional isolation on the ventral midline (confirming with a double-dye system previous observation using a small-molecule probe [Guthrie 1984; Olson et al. 1991; Brizuela et al. 2001], but see Landesman et al. [2000]). Injection of mRNA encoding a dominant negative connexin protein into dorsal blastomeres or wild-type connexins into ventral blastomeres both resulted in heterotaxia and randomization of Nodal expression in the absence of other developmental defects (Levin and Mercola 1998b).

These results indicated that an endogenous path of GJC between dorsal and lateral blastomeres, as well as the isolation across the ventral midline, is necessary for normal LR asymmetry in *Xenopus*. Pharmacological blocker experiments suggested that the gap junctional system begins to function in LR asymmetry during cleavage stages and is upstream of asymmetric XNR-1 and heart tube looping. These data have led to the hypothesis that a circumferential path of GJC, around a zone of isolation, could be the mechanism that bridges asymmetry at the level of a cell (step 1) to the embryo-wide cascades of asymmetric gene expression (step 2). It was proposed (Levin and Nascone 1997; Levin and Mercola 1998b) that small-molecule determinants are initially randomly distributed but traverse the circumferential GJC path unidirectionally, accumulating on one side of the midline, and then induce asymmetric gene expression in conventional ways. Similar data were later obtained in the chick embryo (see below). The identities of the putative low-molecular-weight determinants remain unknown.

[PAGE 5] Ion Flux

One key aspect of the GJC model is that the net junctional flow must be unidirectional in order to derive a LR asymmetry from the existing DV difference in GJC. Hypothesizing that a voltage difference might provide an electromotive force which can be used to electrophorese charged molecules in preferred directions through GJC paths, Levin et al. (2002) tested the model that ion fluxes (needed to generate the standing voltage gradients) might be an obligatory aspect of early LR patterning in *Xenopus*.

A pharmacological screen of hundreds of various types of ion channels, pumps, and co-transporters (Levin et al. 2002) specifically implicated four target genes involved in H+ and K+ flux. One of these, the H+/K+-ATPase, functions during early cleavage stages. Moreover, maternal H+/K+-ATPase mRNA is asymmetrically localized during the first two cell divisions, demonstrating that asymmetry is generated by 2 hours postfertilization. Examination of the situs of asymmetric genes (xNR-1, xLefty, and xPitx-2) following early exposure to blockers of the H+/K+-ATPase revealed that, consistently with the early asymmetrical expression, the ion flux mechanism is upstream of the asymmetric expression of those genes. Gain-of-function experiments using H+/K+-ATPase and K+ channel overexpression constructs also demonstrated that equalizing H+ and K+ flux on either side of the midline randomizes the LR axis.

Taken together, these data demonstrate that the *Xenopus* embryo assigns L and R identities to cells during the first few cleavages. This conclusion is also confirmed by the finding of asymmetric 14-3-3E protein localization, which is crucial for normal LR asymmetry (Bunney et al. 2003). However, a key series of experiments demonstrated that under some circumstances, ectopic organizers induced much later are still able to impose correct LR identity on nearby tissue (Nascone and Mercola 1997). Thus, the *Xenopus* embryo is likely to contain an endogenous very early mechanism for aligning the LR axis, but also the capacity for regulatory patterning of the LR axis at later stages.

[PAGE 5] CHICK

The first morphological asymmetry in the chick embryo is a subtle tilt of Hensen's node toward the end of gastrulation (Kölliker 1879; Hertwig 1902; Dathe et al. 2002). The first obvious sign of asymmetry is the looping of the heart tube, which has been shown to be determined during gastrulation.


[PAGE 5] PATTERNING OF LEFT/RIGHT AXIS

However, ion flux has been implicated in mouse asymmetry. A genetic deletion experiment suggested that the ion channel Polycystin is required for normal asymmetry in the mouse (Pennekamp et al. 2002). More directly, it has recently been shown that asymmetric calcium signaling (Fig. 2B) appears at the left margin of the node at the time of nodal flow (McGrath et al. 2003); this cytoplasmic Ca++ gradient may be related to the extracellular Ca++ flux recently demonstrated in the chick at gastrulation (Raya et al. 2004). Although it is still unknown whether flows of ions other than calcium play a role in rodents and other mammals, and whether Ca++ flow is important for LR patterning prior to mature node stages, future studies of the conservation of ion flow mechanisms among embryos with very different gastrulation modes (frog, chick, rabbit, rodents) are likely to teach us much about asymmetry and basic development.

[PAGE 5/9] Conjoined Twins

It is a long-known but puzzling fact that conjoined twins of armadillo (Newman 1916), fish (Morrill 1919), frog (Spemann and Falkenberg 1919), and man (Aird 1959; Burn 1991; Winer-Muram 1995) often exhibit alterations of situs in one of the twins. It has been proposed that an explanation for the laterality defects might be found in consideration of interactions between signaling molecules in two adjacent primitive streaks. Analysis of spontaneous twins of chick embryos (Levin et al. 1996) by in situ hybridization with probes to asymmetric signaling factors such as Shh and Nodal have given rise to two models that are predictive with respect to which classes of conjoined twins should exhibit laterality defects, and which twin should be affected. For example, parallel streaks during early gastrulation could result in the right-sided Activin of the left embryo inhibiting the expression of Shh in the left side of the right embryo. This would result in a normal left embryo, but the right embryo would have no expression of Shh in the node, leading to lack of Nodal expression and, ultimately, randomized morphological situs. These models have yet to be tested directly in mammalian embryos.


[PAGE 5/9/11] OPEN QUESTIONS AND EVOLUTIONARY PARADIGMS

Because no macroscopic force distinguishes right from left, a powerful paradigm has been proposed to leverage large-scale asymmetry from the chirality of subcellular components (Brown and Wolpert 1990; Brown et al. 1991). In this class of models, some molecule or organelle with a fixed chirality is oriented with respect to the anterior-posterior and dorsoventral axes, and its chiral nature is thus able to nucleate asymmetric processes such as transport (Levin and Mercola 1998a). Thus, the first developmental event that distinguishes left from right would take place on a subcellular scale. However, a mechanism must then exist to transduce subcellular signals to cell fields (Levin and Nascone 1997; Levin and Mercola 1998a). Asymmetric gene expression in embryos requires that fairly large fields of cells know on which side of the midline they are located (e.g., the cells on the right side of the chick node express Activin, but those on the left side do not). In contrast, proposed mechanisms of step 1 of asymmetry (such as the F-molecule model) rely on subcellular mechanisms for determining which direction is left and which is right. Thus, one key question concerns how orientation can be turned into information on a cell's location, relative to the midline, within the context of the whole embryo. This information flow must take place between cells, and cell-cell communication via gap junctions is a natural candidate for such a signal exchange (Levin and Nascone 1997). The extracellular matrix, membrane voltage, and Ca++ signaling are also likely to play a role in this process.

One crucial open question in the field concerns the conservation of the early members of the asymmetric gene cascade. The earliest asymmetric gene known in *Xenopus* is Nodal, which is detected at somite stages. None of the early genes known to be asymmetric during chick gastrulation (Shh, cAct-RIIa, cHNF-3B, Follistatin, cWnt-8C, etc.) has been reported to be asymmetric in *Xenopus* despite searches by a number of labs (Ekker et al. 1995; Stolow and Shi 1995). Interestingly, misexpression of Hedgehog proteins in frog embryos is known to randomize asymmetry (Sampath et al. 1997), raising the possibility that the asymmetric Hedgehog signal exists in amphibia but perhaps utilizes an as-yet-uncharacterized family member. It is possible that the asymmetry in expression exists but has not been detected; it may also be that in *Xenopus* the asymmetries in Hedgehog signaling exist at the level of protein, and not mRNA. The situation with respect to the early asymmetric genes is the same in mouse, where genetic deletions have suggested roles for some of the same molecules (Oh and Li 1997; Tsukui et al. 1999), but no consistent asymmetric gene expression has been reported upstream of Nodal (although the Notch pathway is known to direct Nodal laterality in mice [Krebs et al. 2003; Raya et al. 2003]).

A difference in mechanisms upstream of Nodal may exist between chicks and *Xenopus*. Although in chick embryos, the default state is lack of Nodal expression (Shh signaling is required to induce Nodal transcription on the left side [Levin et al. 1995]), it was reported that explants of right lateral mesoderm from *Xenopus* embryos turn on XNR-1 expression (Lohr et al. 1997), arguing for an endogenous repressive influence from the midline. However, it was later demonstrated that explanted lateral tissue induces ectopic notochord-like structures containing Shh (in both frog and chick embryos), suggesting that an inductive pathway upstream of Nodal may actually be conserved in both species. Regardless of the details of this possible difference between chick and frog embryos, other asymmetric factors definitely exhibit reversed laterality among species. Asymmetry of FGF-8 is opposite in chicks versus mice, as are some downstream events such as asymmetry of Nkx3.2 expression (Meyers and Martin 1999; Schneider et al. 1999).

Vertebrates thus initiate left/right asymmetry by various mechanisms that all, nonetheless, converge on the apparently invariant mechanism of left-sided Nodal signaling. In other words, Nodal may be a "stable point" in the establishment of pattern along the vertebrate left/right axis, whereas the pathways leading to that expression pattern have been free to diverge. This may seem an unlikely result; however, there are other examples of apparent stable points reached by different pathways. One example is the three-layered embryo created by the wide variety of gastrulation movements: The generation of three germ layers is a given, but the suites of movements that result in that organization vary significantly. It is as if stabilizing selection acted on a midpoint, but the means to that midpoint were free to evolve, as were the subsequent events. Of course, each pattern of gastrulation has become important; that is, the characteristic magnitude, direction, and rate of the movements are necessary for normal development of any given species. It is, nonetheless, interesting to speculate as to why having three distinct layers is the *sine qua non* of this stage of development.


Another well-known example of stable points is the pharyngula stage of vertebrate development (Collazo 2000). Despite very different patterns of cleavage and gastrulation, all vertebrates pass through what Gilbert has called a "bottleneck" in the period following neurulation during which diverse species have a very similar appearance regardless of the mechanisms by which they achieved that appearance (Gilbert 2000). This similarity is at the root of von Baer's principles. Raff has suggested that the pharyngula stage is less able to evolve (i.e., is more stable) because only at that stage in development are there whole-embryo-scale inductive events, and thus a need for a whole-embryo-scale geometry that puts inducing and induced tissues in the correct relative orientation. Prior to gastrulation, there are few inductive events; after early organogenesis, induction occurs, but on a localized scale (Raff 1994). The pharyngula stage of vertebrates is particularly interesting in the context of left/right asymmetry, because universal left-sided Nodal expression overlaps with the pharyngula stage. It is tempting to ask whether the stability of Nodal laterality is linked to the morphological stability of this stage in development. It does seem to be an example of a molecular bottleneck.

[PAGE 13] REFERENCES

(References as presented in Extraction 1, removing the duplicate entry from Extraction 2)