[PAGE 1] Basal Xenobot transcriptomics reveals changes and novel control modality in cells freed from organismal influence

Would transcriptomes change if cell collectives acquired a novel morphogenetic and behavioral phenotype in the absence of genomic editing, transgenes, heterologous materials, or drugs? We investigate the effects of morphology and nascent emergent life history on gene expression in the basal (no engineering, no sculpting) form of Xenobots - autonomously motile constructs derived from *Xenopus* embryo ectodermal cell explants. To investigate gene expression differences between cells in the context of an embryo with those that have been freed from instructive signals and acquired novel lived experiences, we compare transcriptomes of these basal Xenobots with age-matched *Xenopus* embryos. Basal Xenobots show significantly larger inter-individual gene variability than age-matched embryos, suggesting increased exploration of the transcriptional space. We identify at least 537 (non-epidermal) transcripts uniquely upregulated in these Xenobots. Phylostratigraphy shows a majority of transcriptomic shifts in the basal Xenobots towards evolutionarily ancient transcripts. Pathway analyses indicate transcriptomic shifts in the categories of motility machinery, multicellularity, stress and immune response, metabolism, thanatotranscriptome, and sensory perception of sound and mechanical stimuli. We experimentally confirm that basal Xenobots respond to acoustic stimuli via changes in behavior. Together, these data may have implications for evolution, biomedicine, and synthetic morphoengineering.

The standard research paradigm of developmental and synthetic biology seeks to discover how gene expression drives specific anatomical and behavioral outcomes¹⁻⁶. However, it is also well-understood that transcriptional machinery itself is sensitive to external cues⁷⁻¹³. Rapid changes of gene expression can be induced by exposures to genetic, biochemical, biomechanical, bioelectrical, and materials-mediated influences. On a much longer timescale, the properties of gene expression profiles in vivo are thought to be determined by evolutionary selection, optimizing fitness to specific environment, life history, and lived experiences¹⁴⁻¹⁸. Here, we sought novel aspects of the responsiveness of gene expression in a setting in which a non-canonical multicellular, functional form is achieved without transgenes, chemical signals, foreign nanomaterials, or other added influence.

A fascinating set of questions concerns the origins of species-specific transcriptomic profiles, normally shaped by eons of selection over the functionality of those forms in a specific environmental context. Unique aspects of these questions can be addressed in synthetic systems in which the entities have not had a history of selection in their current multicellular embodiment. Numerous synthetic life forms have recently been produced¹⁹⁻²⁹; however, many questions remain to be answered via analysis of transcriptomic profiling in these synthetic living configurations. In this study, we utilize one such living system to understand how synthetic morphology might result in transcriptomic changes. Our goal was to characterize unique transcriptomic changes in this synthetic living system in comparison to its native (wild-type) embryo context and understand the effect of novel lived experiences (and removal of instructive endogenous signals) on the transcriptome.

Multiple different kinds of autonomously moving biobots²³,³⁰,³¹ can be derived from *Xenopus* embryonic cells. They offer self-organization (a kind of developmental morphogenesis), as they need no scaffold in order to form and mature into functional constructs. They can form from a single tissue (prospective skin/epidermis) or from a combination of multiple tissues (e.g., skin/epidermis and muscles), can be of a multitude of shapes, and be actuated by either muscle contraction or coordinated beating of cilia³²⁻³⁵. They show self-healing and emergent group behaviors including kinematic self-

[PAGE 2] replication³³,³⁴. This overall class is referred to as “Xenobots”³² to emphasize their utility as potentially programmable living materials—a model system in which to learn to control the plasticity of living active matter toward applications that shed light on life-as-it-can-be³⁶⁻⁴². In this study, we use the basal (spherical) Xenobots³² derived from completely wild-type ectodermal explant cells with no drugs, synthetic biology circuits, nanomaterials, sculpting, or anything else added. Hence, we can observe latent behaviors of these cellular collectives that are released by lifting signaling constraints present when they were part of the larger organism⁴³⁻⁴⁸.

The basal Xenobots are autonomously motile, self-assembling constructs derived from frog (*Xenopus laevis*) embryonic ectodermal explants (colloquially referred to in developmental biology studies as "animal caps") as starting material³³. The *Xenopus* ectodermal explants (animal caps) have been studied for several decades and serve as an excellent model for studying epidermal cell fate and patterning, as well as testing the plasticity and responsiveness of these cells to various inducers and inhibitors⁴⁹⁻⁵⁵. Also, mucociliary organoids developed from these *Xenopus* ectodermal explants have served as excellent models for understanding dynamics of mucociliary epidermis formation and maintenance⁵⁶⁻⁶¹. However, we cultured these ectodermal explants until they formed autonomously-moving atypical entities, aka the basal Xenobots used in this study. We were particularly interested in studying the transcriptomic changes in these autonomously-moving Xenobots. Recently, elegant temporal transcriptomic analysis has shown epidermal cell fate specification during the transformation of *Xenopus* ectodermal explants (animal caps) to autonomously-moving atypical entities (the basal Xenobots used in this study)⁵⁶,⁶². However, in this study, we sought to broadly analyze genome-wide transcriptomic changes well beyond epidermal cell fate specification in response to a not previously selected-for embodiment and nascent life history of these autonomously-moving atypical entities—as a system that self-assembles without being forced onto an engineered scaffold and exhibits autonomous motion behavior (being functionally closer to a proto-organism than a typical organoid). We see these autonomously-moving atypical entities (basal Xenobots) as an important biorobotics platform because, once their properties are understood, they can be used as a testbed in which to improve our understanding and ability to control growth and form, and ultimately deploy them for many useful purposes. Unlike conventional robotic materials, living cells offer numerous complex behaviors and responses; understanding the plasticity and molecular-biological responses of cell collective entities in new contexts is a critical part of morphogenic engineering efforts¹⁹,³⁰,³¹,⁶³⁻⁶⁵.

To advance this engineering roadmap, as well as more broadly understand how transcriptomes respond to internal and external environment changes (e.g., for biomedical purposes, as well as basic evolutionary developmental biology), we compared the transcriptome of basal Xenobots to those of age-matched embryo controls. Our goal was to characterize transcriptomic changes in cells released from the constraints and influences of the rest of the embryo, and thus following a different developmental trajectory and nascent emergent life history. Importantly, we did not focus on gene expression missing from Xenobots because it was expected that, being made of just one tissue type, they would lack many transcripts that normal embryos expressed. Instead, we asked what transcripts, other than epidermal markers (expected to be enriched), Xenobots expressed that their age-matched embryos did not. We found at least 537 transcripts to be uniquely upregulated in these Xenobots, representing functional classes such as locomotion apparatus assemblies (cilia and motor proteins), structure formation and multicellularity, stress and immune response, metabolism, and even sensory perception of sound and mechanical stimuli. Functional experiments confirmed that basal Xenobots, unlike age-matched *Xenopus* embryos, indeed respond to acoustic vibration stimuli by changing their motion behavior. Phylostratigraphic analysis shows that the majority of these transcriptomic shifts are towards evolutionarily ancient transcripts and systems. These changes suggested that alteration of morphology and nascent emergent life history, in wild-type cells, were enough to strongly affect the transcriptome (morphology/behavior driving gene expression). Moreover, we found a significantly greater inter-individual gene variability

[PAGE 3] in these Xenobots compared to their age-matched *Xenopus* embryos, suggesting exploratory adaptation in the transcriptional space to adapt and survive in their new embodiment⁶⁶⁻⁶⁹. Another unique aspect that these Xenobots allowed us to investigate was the nature of organismic death and its effects on gene expression. By making a Xenobot out of an embryonic source of cells, the original embryo “dies”—it is no more; but the cells persist and continue on in a new embodiment. Our analysis revealed enrichment of thanatotrascriptomic⁷⁰⁻⁷⁴ genes, seen previously in studies of human post-mortem molecular physiology. Taken together, these data shed light on the feedback of form and function onto cellular genetics, in the context of evolved and engineered living beings transitioning across levels of organization.


[PAGE 3] RESULTS

RNA sequencing analysis shows no major transcriptional changes between stage 35/36 *Xenopus* embryos raised in 0.1X MMR and 0.75X MMR

One major difference in the rearing condition of *Xenopus* embryos and basal Xenobots used in this study is the MMR (Marc's Modified Ringers) medium concentration: embryos are reared in 0.1X MMR, Xenobots are reared in 0.75X MMR (a higher concentration of salts). Thus, we first asked whether raising embryos in 0.75X MMR induces any significant transcriptional changes in comparison to embryos raised in 0.1X MMR. We performed RNA sequencing analysis on stage 35/36 *Xenopus* embryos (stage corresponds to the formation of mature autonomously-moving Xenobots on day 7 at 14 °C after explanting ectodermal explants (animal caps) from stage 9 embryos) raised in either 0.1X MMR or raised in 0.75X MMR after stage 9 (stage at which ectodermal explants are removed from embryos and placed in 0.75X MMR to make the basal Xenobots). We collected RNA from three replicate samples (each sample containing ten stage 35/36 embryos) for each condition (0.1X and 0.75X MMR) (Supplementary Fig. 1A). Overall, we observed no separation between groups by principal component analysis (Supplementary Fig. 1B). However, after surrogate variable analysis and batch-correction, we did observe some separation of the clusters (Supplementary Fig. 1C). We thus performed differential gene expression analysis and found that in the histograms of significance the *p* value histograms are relatively flat, with the proportions of the true null hypothesis (non-significant genes) to be 0.996 (Supplementary Fig. 1D) and all FDRs (False Discovery Rates) to be near one (Supplementary Fig. 1E). These results indicate minimal changes in the overall transcriptome of 0.75X MMR raised embryos versus 0.1X MMR raised embryos. Differential expression analysis showed that out of ~24,500 transcripts, only 6 genes were significantly changed (FDR < 0.05) with a log fold change > 2 in the 0.75X MMR raised embryos (Supplementary Fig. 1F and Supplementary Data 1). These results show that overall raising embryos in the higher salt medium at 0.75X MMR results in very little transcriptional change – the transcriptome is not highly sensitive to external conditions.

RNA-sequencing analysis shows major transcriptional changes in the basal Xenobots compared to age-matched stage 35/36 *Xenopus* embryos

The basal Xenobots are derived by explanting ectodermal explant (animal cap) tissue from stage 9 *Xenopus* embryos and reach maturity by day 7: fully differentiated cells, peak cellular health, and peak robust autonomous movement behavior³³. To test our hypothesis that these Xenobots would have unique and distinct transcriptomic changes compared to normal *Xenopus* embryos, we compared these Xenobots' transcriptome to that of age-matched (stage 35/36) control *Xenopus* embryos that were reared in identical conditions (incubation temperature and time) as the Xenobots. We collected RNA from three pooled samples for each condition (Xenobots and age-matched stage 35/36 *Xenopus* embryos) (Fig. 1A) and performed RNA-seq to compare the two transcriptomes. Principal component analysis using surrogate variables and batch-correction showed marked separation between the clusters of Xenobot transcriptome and that of age-matched *Xenopus* embryos (Supplementary Fig. 2). Differential expression analysis

[PAGE 3] showed that out of 28,009 transcripts, 1962 transcripts were significantly upregulated (FDR < 0.05) with log fold change > 2 in these Xenobots compared to age-matched embryos and 5053 transcripts were significantly downregulated (FDR < 0.05) with log fold change < −2 in these Xenobots compared to age-matched embryos (Fig. 1B). These results show that overall, these Xenobots have major transcriptional differences from age-matched *Xenopus* embryos.

The basal Xenobots have greater inter-individual gene count variability than age-matched stage 35/36 *Xenopus* embryos

In the principal component analysis (Supplementary Fig. 2), the three Xenobots samples show much wider separation compared to the three age-matched embryo samples. Previous work has shown that cells experiencing novel stressors can randomly change their gene expression profiles until they find configurations that resolve the stress, and that individual cells discover different expression profiles that solve the same problem⁶⁶,⁶⁸,⁶⁹,⁷⁵,⁷⁶. We hypothesized that the process of removal from the embryo serves as a novel stressor for the nascent Xenobot tissue, requiring the tissue to adapt to its new embodiment in ways that evolution did not prepare it for. In contrast, while embryos are indeed capable of solving novel problems to achieve their developmental goals⁷⁷, their developmental trajectory is more stereotyped and likely requires less transcriptional exploration than do these Xenobots. We compared the variability of individual transcripts among biological samples using the method in Fig. 2A. Briefly, all 28,009 gene transcripts were ranked based on their mean count values across all samples (3 Xenobot samples and 3 *Xenopus* embryo samples), combined, and genes for which

[PAGE 4] any sample had a value of 0 were removed. The standard deviations of individual gene transcripts among Xenobot samples and *Xenopus* embryo samples were estimated and used to calculate the coefficient of variation (CV) for each gene as plotted in Fig. 2B histograms. In Xenobots, genes have significantly higher inter-individual CVs and a broader range of CVs than embryos (Wilcoxon Rank Sum test, *p* = 0) (Fig. 2B). The ranked gene list was split into 100 equal-size bins (percentiles), and the fraction of genes in each bin for which CV of the Xenobots (CVX) was greater than the CV of the *Xenopus* embryos (CVE) was plotted (Fig. 2C). We found that almost all genes have a greater CV for Xenobots than *Xenopus* embryos (96.06% of all included genes, shown by the red line) (Fig. 2C). Also, the general trend of increasing bin fraction with higher gene count percentile indicated that, the higher the gene expression, the higher is the variability of that gene in Xenobots compared to *Xenopus* embryos (Fig. 2C). A permutation test (see "Methods") revealed that these deviations from the expected (null hypothesis) bin fraction value (0.9606 the red line in Fig. 2C) across gene count percentiles were statistically significant (dark blue colored bins with *p* < 0.05). Among the top ten most variable genes in these Xenobots (Fig. 2D), Oncomodulin gene which encodes a protein with widely distinct functional roles⁷⁸ is most prominent with three oncomodulin genes in the top ten (Fig. 2D). Other interesting genes include *A. superbus* venom factor 1, salivary glue protein-3 like protein, neurotrimin, tenomodulin, somatostatin receptor 4, chloride intracellular channel 4 (Fig. 2D). Thus overall, there is significantly greater gene count variability in these Xenobots compared to age-matched *Xenopus* embryos, possibly indicating exploratory adaptation in the transcriptional space to adapt and survive in their new embodiment.

Stringent curation of Xenobot transcripts

The basal Xenobots are derived from ectodermal explants (animal cap explants), which are primarily ectodermal progenitor cells. Most cells and tissues belonging to mesoderm and endoderm are absent in these Xenobots as compared to *Xenopus* embryos. Hence, mesoderm and endoderm transcripts would come out as highly downregulated in these Xenobots compared to age-matched embryos, largely due to the absence of those cells and tissues in these Xenobots (false positives). Similar to previous studies, we found no clear path to resolve and differentiate which downregulated transcripts (out of the 5053 downregulated transcripts) are changed due to the absence of mesoderm and endoderm (false positives) and which transcripts are truly downregulated in these Xenobots compared to age-matched *Xenopus* embryos (true positives). Hence, we did not further analyze the downregulated transcripts dataset.

Conversely, Xenobots are fully derived from ectoderm, but ectoderm only forms a small portion of the whole embryo (~10%). Thus, in a head-to-head comparison, ectodermal genes would be artificially enriched in these Xenobots, resulting in false positives due to simple proportional enrichment of ectodermal tissues. To adjust for this, we subtracted out the artificially enriched ectodermal/epidermal-specific transcripts from the 1962 upregulated transcripts to curate a list of transcripts uniquely upregulated in these Xenobots, which could not be explained by the increased prevalence of ectodermal cells. To achieve this, we used Klein tools—a database of single-cell transcriptome of stage 22 entire *Xenopus* embryo⁷⁹. We subtracted out the entire gene set for embryonic epidermal progenitors in *Xenopus* embryos, leaving 1742 transcripts that were upregulated in these Xenobots (Supplementary Data 2). ~41% (712 transcripts) of the transcripts were uncharacterized “LOC” genes. We used genome-wide functional annotation tool eggNOG-mappers⁸⁰ to annotate these uncharacterized transcripts using human (most annotated genome) orthologs. We first tested the functional annotation using a small subset of already known *Xenopus* transcripts and found ~80% accuracy, with differences mostly being different versions of the same gene. After functional annotation of the uncharacterized transcripts, removing any remaining unannotated transcripts, and removing all duplicate transcripts from short and long chromosomes, we were left with 1078 uniquely upregulated transcripts in these Xenobots compared to age-matched *Xenopus* embryos (Supplementary Data 3).


[PAGE 4] We found many cilia and motor protein transcripts in the 1078 uniquely upregulated transcripts in Xenobots, which suggested the possibility that perhaps even after epidermal gene subtraction, there might still be some false positively enriched epidermal transcripts, particularly belonging to the epidermal multiciliate cells. To address this issue, we raised our stringency to very high (likely losing some true positives) by again resorting to Klein tools database of single-cell transcriptome of stage 22 entire *Xenopus* embryos⁷⁹. In addition to the epidermal progenitor gene subtraction already performed, we collected all the genes expressed in the different types of epidermal cells, namely, multiciliated cells, alpha and beta ionocytes, and

[PAGE 5] goblet cells. We then subtracted any genes from any of these four cells that were present in our list of 1078 transcripts uniquely upregulated in these Xenobots. We then obtained a highly stringent list of 795 transcripts in which we had high confidence that these transcripts were uniquely upregulated in these Xenobots compared to age-matched embryos. After mapping these 795 transcripts to human orthologs, we obtained 537 transcripts, which were then used for subsequent comparisons and analysis (Supplementary Data 4).

Functional analysis of transcripts uniquely upregulated in these Xenobots compared to age-matched *Xenopus* embryos

What kind of genes did the basal Xenobots upregulate? To understand the biological processes that might be affected by their unique transcripts, we first performed functional enrichment analysis using the Database for Annotation, Visualization and Integrated Discovery (DAVID)⁸¹,⁸². Using DAVID, we identified enriched biological themes amongst significantly differentially expressed genes and clustered the redundant annotation terms using the Functional Annotation Clustering tool. We identified the most enriched functional clusters and ranked them based on their group enrichment score, which is the geometric mean (in -log scale) of members' *p* values in a corresponding annotation cluster (Fig. 3A and Supplementary Data 5). Interestingly, despite the very high stringency and removal of genes expressed by epidermal cells, we found enrichment of cilia, ciliopathies, and motor proteins. We also found categories for immune response and signaling, and metabolism/biosynthesis. Interestingly, we found a category of membrane proteins that contained the largest number of genes belonging to various functions such as ion channels and transporters, gap junction and junctional proteins, calcium binding proteins, ATP binding proteins, sound or mechanical stimuli responsive proteins.

In addition, we also performed a network analysis to identify active functional biological modules⁸³,⁸⁴. We combined gene expression and interaction data and then applied network embedding, followed by clustering similarly to that performed by refs. ⁸⁵,⁸⁶. The detected functional modules were then enriched using g:profiler⁸⁷. This network clustering analysis identified 10 enriched clusters (Supplementary Data 6). Many of the clusters were similar to the functional enrichment analysis (Supplementary Data 5 and 6), such as cilia/cytoskeleton/ciliopathies, immune and stress response, metabolism/biosynthesis (Fig. 3, Supplementary Fig. 3, and Supplementary Data 5 and 6). We also found clusters for extracellular matrix (ECM)/proliferation/multicellular organization, and sensory perception of sound and mechanical stimuli (Fig. 3, Supplementary Fig. 3, and Supplementary Data 6).

In summary, we identified biological processes enriched in these Xenobots compared to age-matched *Xenopus* embryos. These include cilia and motor proteins, tissue building/multicellular organization, immune and stress response, metabolism shift, and perception of sound and mechanical stimuli. Among these, the tissue building/multicellular organization and immune and stress response were unsurprising as these functions are required for building any novel morphology⁸⁸⁻⁹². The presence of cilia and motor proteins in spite of our very high stringency, was surprising. Lastly, the shift in metabolism compared to embryo and the presence of sensory perception of sound and mechanical stimuli were extremely surprising.

Transcripts uniquely upregulated in these Xenobots do not include any mesodermal, endodermal, or any axis patterning genes

To assess whether any mesodermal, endodermal, or axis patterning genes were being up-regulated in the basal Xenobots, we first curated a list of most prominent genes for each of these categories from literature (Supplementary Data 7). We then compared to see if any of these genes are expressed in our high-stringency transcripts upregulated in these Xenobots. None of the critical genes from mesoderm, endoderm, mesendoderm, anterior-posterior patterning, dorso-ventral patterning, or left-right patterning were found to be enriched in these Xenobots. This suggests that it is unlikely that these Xenobots perform transdifferentiation to recover their missing germ layers.


[PAGE 5] Xenobots change their motion behavior in response to acoustic vibration stimuli

Sensory perception of sound and mechanical stimuli was one of the most surprising gene clusters for biological processes identified to be significantly upregulated in Xenobots (Fig. 3). The possibility that basal Xenobots could exhibit novel functional responses to sound is fascinating as it would provide a tractable method to control Xenobot physiology and/or behavior, as well as shed light on the evolutionary developmental biology consequences of changes of morphology and nascent emergent life history. To test this, we developed a setup (Fig. 4A) to provide acoustic vibration stimulus to these Xenobots and tested their response. We used day 7 mature Xenobots, day 1 Xenobots (24 h after explanting ectodermal explants from embryos), and age-matched stage 35/36 *Xenopus* embryos. As controls, we used immotile Xenobots (Xenobots treated with nocodazole to inhibit cilia function, thus inhibiting their movement) and ciliated age-matched normal *Xenopus* embryos. We found that day 7 mature Xenobots showed a change in their motion behavior in response to acoustic vibration stimulus (Fig. 4 and Supplementary Movies 5 and 6), whereas day 1 Xenobots, age-matched *Xenopus* embryos, and immotile Xenobots did not show any change in their motion behavior in response to acoustic vibration stimulus (Fig. 4 and Supplementary Movies 1–4). This change in motion behavior is not due to physical movement of medium or simple mechanical effect of vibration on cilia function (Fig. 4 and Supplementary Movies 1–4), as indicated by controls (immotile bots and ciliated age-matched normal *Xenopus* embryos, neither of which responded to the stimulus). These results confirm that basal Xenobots, unlike age-matched *Xenopus* embryos, indeed respond to acoustic vibration stimuli by changing their motion behavior.

[PAGE 7] Xenobot transcripts show enrichment of thanatotranscriptomic genes

We next turned our attention to additional aspects of the RNAseq results. Recent studies have shown the surprising fact that cells actively turn on specific genes after an organism's death—the so-called thanatotranscriptome⁷¹,⁷³,⁹⁴⁻⁹⁷. This is fascinating as it provides a way to dissociate death of an organism from that of its cells, thus shedding light on deep issues of multicellularity and emergent levels of organization in biology. We hypothesized that the data from human thanatotranscriptome studies indicated the cells' attempt to survive in another form after the demise of the organism. In the case of mammals, living in dry air, this would be futile, but in the case of amphibians, this could work, and indeed, these Xenobots represent just that scenario—the original body is destroyed, but some of the cells live on in another form. Would these Xenobots express thanatotranscriptome genes?

As control we used all the genes expressed in *Xenopus* embryonic epidermal progenitor cells + multiciliated cells + alpha and beta ionocytes + goblet cells (obtained with Klein tools database⁷⁹), a total of 2635 genes (without LOC genes and mapped to human orthologs—Supplementary Data 8). From the literature, we curated the thanatotranscriptomic genes (336 genes) (Supplementary Data 9). Then we determined what percentage of transcripts uniquely upregulated in these Xenobots (537 genes mapped to human orthologs—Supplementary Data 4) are in the thanatotranscriptome set in comparison to the controls (total list of genes from all epidermal cell types—2635 genes—Supplementary Data 8). We found that the Xenobot-upregulated genes had more than double (3.5%) of thanatotranscriptome genes compared to control genes (1.6%) (Supplementary Data 10). Enrichment analysis of these Xenobot genes overlapping with the thanatotranscriptome suggests they mostly belong to immune activation, stress response, and insulin signaling. This suggests that the self-assembly process of these Xenobots following the harvesting of their source cells from an embryo may have similarities to the death process in other metazoan, including humans.

Evolutionary age of enriched Xenobot transcripts

To test the hypothesis that the basal Xenobots were acquiring more ancient transcriptomic patterns as a result of their morphogenesis and nascent emergent life history, we performed a phylostratigraphic analysis⁹⁸⁻¹⁰³. For this analysis, we did not need to remove LOC genes, and we did not need any mapping to human orthologs, so the fullest extent of the gene lists was used. We used PhylostratR¹⁸⁸, which applied BLAST to compare the whole *Xenopus* genome to at maximum 5 different proteomes of representative organisms of different ages in each evolutionary tree strata. Subsets of all genes in *Xenopus* genome associated with each stratum were shortlisted. Xenobot transcripts and control transcripts were then compared against these shortlisted genes. To determine the evolutionary age of transcripts from these Xenobots, we used both the unique Xenobot transcripts (1450 genes including LOC genes without mapping to human ortholog) and all the Xenobot up-regulated transcripts (1812 genes after removing short and long gene duplicates) and compared them to the controls (all the genes expressed in epidermal progenitor cells + multiciliated cells + alpha and beta ionocytes + goblet cells – 3374 genes including LOC genes without mapping to human orthologs). Going as far back as Vertebrata, there was not much difference between overlap of controls vs Xenobot transcripts. However, going further back in evolutionary time showed major enrichment of Xenobot transcripts overlap in comparison to controls for example, Bilateria, Eumetazoa, and Metazoa showed much more overlap with Xenobot transcripts than controls (Fig. 5). In addition, in these (Bilateria, Eumetazoa, and Metazoa) phyla the unique Xenobot genes showed more overlap than all Xenobot up-regulated genes (Fig. 5) indicating that the unique Xenobot genes were enriched for older phyla even in comparison to its own overexpressed genes suggesting specific enrichment of evolutionary older genes. Overall, this indicates that the transcripts upregulated in these Xenobots are particularly evolutionarily ancient genes.


[PAGE 7] Discussion

In this study, we try to make inroads into the relationships between genomes, transcriptomes, and overall morphology¹². This is a fundamental question in biology with many knowledge gaps concerning the range and plasticity of the latent space around a genome with respect to transcriptome and morphology, and lack of predictive power for the properties of novel constructs²⁰,¹⁰⁴,¹⁰⁵ and chimeras²⁵,¹⁰⁶. Tremendous progress in the fields of synthetic biology, synthetic morphology, and biorobotics has made available biological model systems that are unencumbered by a history of environmental selection forces and serve as great model systems in which to understand the emergence of novel molecular-genetic, physiological, and morphological phenotypes.

In this study, we ask the question, how does the transcriptome change in response to cellular collectives acquiring non-evolved embodiments and behaviors in the absence of any genomic editing, drug treatments, or heterologous interventions—to understand the top-down influence of morphology over transcriptome. Our goal was to utilize a synthetic living system to identify unique transcriptomic changes in it, in comparison to its native (wild-type) context. For this, we exploited the Xenobots platform, which includes multiple different kinds of autonomously-moving biobots all


[PAGE 8] derived from *Xenopus* embryonic cells³²⁻³⁵,³⁷,¹⁰⁷. We analyzed the basal Xenobots, which are autonomously-motile, self-assembling multicellular entities derived from *Xenopus* ectodermal explants (animal caps)³³. The *Xenopus* ectodermal explants have a rich history of serving as a tractable model system for investigating epidermal cell fate specification and cell fate plasticity in response to various chemical stimuli⁴⁹⁻⁵⁵. In addition, mucociliary organoids derived from them have helped understand mucociliary epidermis dynamics⁵⁶⁻⁶¹.

Recent transcriptomic analysis has looked at epidermal cell fate specification during transformation of these ectodermal explants to the autonomously-moving entities (basal Xenobots)⁵⁶,⁶². However, in this study, we investigate the transcriptome of these Xenobots in comparison to their native wild-type embryonic tissue using a different transcriptomic analysis beyond epidermal cell fate specification, to understand how these Xenobots' morphology and behavior affect their transcriptomic changes. We found significantly greater inter-individual gene variability in these Xenobots, suggesting adaptive exploration of the transcriptional space to adapt to their novel embodiment and associated stressors. Gene ontology and network analysis of unique (non-epidermal marker) transcriptomic changes showed both expected shifts in multicellular organization and immune/stress response along with surprising changes in metabolism and sensory perception of sound and mechanical stimuli. Indeed, these autonomously motile basal Xenobots respond to acoustic stimulation by changing their motion behavior while motile age-matched embryos and passive non-motile Xenobots do not. Phylostratigraphic analysis showed transcriptional changes reflecting evolutionarily ancient genes. We also found significant enrichment of thanatotranscriptomic genes, suggesting signatures of organismal death in them. Overall, all these transcriptomic changes in


[PAGE 9] these Xenobots suggest that alteration of morphology and nascent emergent life history were enough to strongly affect the transcriptome (morphology/behavior driving gene expression).

Since these Xenobots are raised in different media concentration (0.75X MMR) as opposed to embryos (0.1X MMR), we first wanted to see if there are any major transcriptome changes in response to the different media concentration. Since the ectodermal explants were excised from embryos at stage 9 and incubated in 0.75X MMR for making these Xenobots, we incubated embryos in 0.75X MMR from stage 9 onwards until age-matched stage to mature day 7 Xenobots. Raising embryos in 0.75X MMR after stage 9 remarkably showed normal embryonic development with no developmental morphology defects, and embryos looking similar to their sibling raised in 0.1X MMR. Comparing the transcriptome of embryos raised in 0.1X MMR to 0.75X MMR showed no major transcriptome differences (only 6 transcripts out of ~24,500 transcripts showed significant differences) (Supplementary Fig. 1). This was very surprising and suggests that the embryonic transcriptional regulation is very well shielded from external environmental changes. This might be due to the presence of tight junctions in the outermost ectodermal layer, which compartmentalizes the embryos from their external environment. If embryos are raised in 0.75X MMR from pre-stage 9, then they do not undergo normal gastrulation and do show developmental defects, suggesting as previously documented, that the pre-gastrulation embryos are much more susceptible to environmental differences than a post-gastrulation embryo.

To deal with false positives, we used the scRNAseq database of Klein tools⁷⁹. However, the caveat is that we had to use scRNA data from stage 22 embryos, whereas our age-matched embryos were stage 35. This stage 22 scRNA dataset is the best accessible results we have as there are no stage 35 scRNAseq datasets which we could use to remove epidermal progenitor transcripts. However, by stage 22, epidermal cell differentiation has already occurred⁶²,⁷⁹. In addition, to eliminate false positives, we took an extremely stringent approach by removing all genes expressed in epidermal progenitor cells, multiciliated cells, alpha and beta ionocytes, and goblet cells from our Xenobot dataset. In fact, this stringent curation may have resulted in the loss of some true positives, but it was worth it to give us good confidence in our results. Overall, our highly stringent list of Xenobot transcripts is a good starting point to look into unique transcriptional aspects of these Xenobots and to begin understanding how genome/transcriptome relates to novel morphologies. In future, single-cell RNA sequencing of Xenobots might allow us to look at regional and cell-type-specific expression patterns in Xenobots and how ectodermal progenitor cells distribution and profile diverge between Xenobots and embryos.

We compared and analyzed the transcriptome of these Xenobots with their age-matched *Xenopus* embryos to determine effects of altered morphology and nascent emergent life history on transcriptome. Our results give an indication of the kinds of transcriptional changes induced by change of morphology and behavior (no genomic editing or transgenes). We found at least 537 transcripts uniquely upregulated in these Xenobots (Supplementary Data 4). These transcripts indicated enriched functions such as locomotion apparatus assemblies (cilia-based motion and motor proteins), structure formation and multicellularity, stress and immune response, shift in metabolism, and sensory perception of sound and mechanical stimuli (Fig. 3, Supplementary Fig. 3, and Supplementary Data 5 and 6). The majority of these shifts were towards evolutionary older systems, which likely get suppressed when they are part of the organism. Phylostratigraphic analysis shows the transcripts uniquely upregulated in these Xenobots compared to the wild-type tissue are enriched for evolutionarily ancient genes and systems (Fig. 5). This is fascinating and suggests that cellular functional plasticity can roll backwards along the “ontogeny recapitulates phylogeny” axis, utilizing gene ensembles and systems from their distant evolutionary past that might be relevant in their new configuration and environment. Future work will examine possible links to similar phenomena (a shift toward ancient, unicellular transcripts) in cancer¹⁰⁸ and potential implications for the relationship between cancer and multicellularity¹⁰⁹,¹¹⁰.

[PAGE 9] The transcripts uniquely upregulated in these Xenobots compared to the wild-type tissue also showed enrichment for thanatotrascriptomic genes⁷¹,⁷³,⁹⁴⁻⁹⁷,¹¹¹, which are transcripts awakened in cells and organs after the overall organism dies. These transcripts mainly included immune/stress response and insulin signals. What this suggests is that these Xenobots have some sort of memory/information of them not being part of "living organism". One possibility is that this might be evidence that the cells experienced the Xenobot construction event as the death of their parent organism; it is also likely that the thanatotranscriptome is limited by the fact they retained multicellularity; perhaps dissociating the cells and having them reboot multicellularity (as occurs in a different type of Xenobot³³) might show a much stronger thanatotrascriptomic response. One challenge in this field has been that it was not possible to test whether these death-induced genes