Left-right patterning in Xenopus conjoined twin embryos
requires serotonin signaling and gap junctions

LAURA N. VANDENBERG1,2, DOUGLAS J. BLACKISTON¹, ADAM C. REA³, TIMOTHY M.
DORE3,4, MICHAEL LEVIN*,1
1Biology Department, Center for Regenerative and Developmental Biology, Tufts University,
Medford, MA, USA,
2Department of Public Health, Division of Environmental Health Sciences, University of
Massachusetts - Amherst, Amherst, MA, USA,
3Department of Chemistry, University of Georgia, Athens, GA, USA and
4New York University Abu Dhabi, Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates

Abstract
A number of processes operating during the first cell cleavages enable the left-right (LR) axis to
be consistently oriented during Xenopus laevis development. Prior work showed that secondary
organizers induced in frog embryos after cleavage stages (i.e. conjoined twins arising from ectopic
induced primary axes) correctly pattern their own LR axis only when a primary (early) organizer is
also present. This instructive effect confirms the unique LR patterning functions that occur during
early embryogenesis, but leaves open the question: which mechanisms that operate during early
stages are also involved in the orientation of later-induced organizers? We sought to distinguish the
two phases of LR patterning in secondary organizers (LR patterning of the primary twin and the
later transfer of this information to the secondary twin) by perturbing only the latter process. Here,
we used reagents that do not affect primary LR patterning at the time secondary organizers form
to inhibit each of 4 mechanisms in the induced twin. Using pharmacological, molecular-genetic,
and photo-chemical tools, we show that serotonergic and gap-junctional signaling, but not proton
or potassium flows, are required for the secondary organizer to appropriately pattern its LR axis
in a multicellular context. We also show that consistently-asymmetric gene expression begins
prior to ciliary flow. Together, our data highlight the importance of physiological signaling in the
propagation of cleavage-derived LR orientation to multicellular cell fields.

Keywords
ion flux; polarity; heterotaxia; drug screen; connexin; twinning; asymmetry; gap junction


[PAGE 2] Introduction
After fertilization, one of the key milestones of embryogenesis is the establishment
of the primary body axes. Developmental biologists have long been intrigued by the
mechanisms responsible for orienting the left-right (LR) axis, which is defined with respect
to the anterior-posterior and dorsal-ventral axes (Brown and Wolpert, 1990; Tabin, 2011).
Although the vast majority of vertebrate species display LR-symmetrical external body
plans, these animals have consistent asymmetries in the position and shape of the internal
organs including the heart, stomach, gall bladder, spleen, and brain (Palmer, 1996; Palmer,
2004; Aw and Levin, 2008). Birth defects that disrupt LR patterning affect about 1 in 6000
live births, but are often accompanied by severe medical consequences, particularly when
LR placement of individual organs in the body is randomized, a condition referred to as
heterotaxia (Casey and Hackett, 2000; Hackett, 2002; Peeters and Devriendt, 2006; Cohen et
al., 2007).

The establishment and orientation of the LR axis requires 3 distinct steps that take place at
progressively later stages of development: symmetry breaking, when the two sides of the
embryo first become different and the nascent LR axis is consistently aligned with respect
to the other 2 body axes; the conversion of these asymmetries to LR-biased expression
of genes such as the Nodal-Lefty-Pitx cassette; and the translation of this asymmetric
gene expression into asymmetric morphology and position of organs (Basu and Brueckner,
2008; Blum et al., 2009; Vandenberg and Levin, 2010b; Burdine and Caspary, 2013;
Vandenberg and Levin, 2013). Although the last two phases are fairly well understood and
are generally considered not controversial, there remain many questions about the earliest
steps in symmetry breaking.

In Xenopus embryos, LR asymmetries are observed during early cleavage stages due to
the presence of a consistently biased, chiral cytoskeleton (Bunney et al., 2003; Danilchik
et al., 2006; Aw et al., 2008; Lobikin et al., 2012b). The chiral cytoskeleton (and possibly
differential chromatid segregation (Klar, 1994; Armakolas and Klar, 2007; Klar, 2008;
Armakolas et al., 2010; Sauer and Klar, 2012)) drives the asymmetric distribution of proteins
including K+ channels and H+ pumps, which become more strongly localized to the ventral
right blastomere (Levin et al., 2002; Adams et al., 2006; Morokuma et al., 2008; Aw
et al., 2010). The biased localization of these ion transporters establishes consistent LR
differences in the pH and transmembrane voltage on the left and right sides of the embryo.
The asymmetric efflux of positively charged ions establishes a bioelectrical gradient, with
the ventral right blastomere more negatively charged; this gradient drives further asymmetric
distribution of small charged molecules such as serotonin (5-HT) via a series of open
gap junctions connecting across a circumferential path throughout the dorsal portion of
the embryo (Levin and Mercola, 1998; Fukumoto et al., 2003; Fukumoto et al., 2005b).
Serotonin's accumulation in the cells to the right of the ventral gap-junctional boundary
epigenetically represses the expression of the nodal homolog Xnr-1 via a Mad3-HDAC1
receptor complex, resulting in the lack of expression of this gene on the right side of the
body (Carneiro et al., 2011; Vandenberg et al., 2013b). Ciliary motion during late gastrula
and early neurula stages also feeds into the expression of laterality genes (Vick et al., 2009).


[PAGE 3] 
Although many aspects of the intracellular asymmetry pathway have been demonstrated
to be conserved in other species including chick, snails, Drosophila, zebrafish, and even
single mammalian cells (reviewed in Levin, 2006; Vandenberg et al., 2013a), the Xenopus
embryo has an advantage in that the earliest steps in the LR pathway normally occur when
there are only a small number of blastomeres present, and these blastomeres are in direct
contact with each other (Levin, 2003). Can these same mechanisms operate to establish LR
asymmetry in embryos with vastly different body plans, including in embryos that orient
the LR axis when hundreds or thousands of cells are present? The Xenopus conjoined twin
model (Nascone and Mercola, 1997) offers an experimental system where the molecular
genetic tools useful in identifying early determinants in the LR pathway are available,
but where a more complex body plan can be probed. Conjoined twins can be induced by
introducing molecular elements of Spemann's organizer, such as the transcription factor
XSiamois, to the developing embryo at a position 180 degrees across from the native
organizer. Twins induced by this method only form after the mid-blastula transition, when
zygotic transcription commences, enabling the induced secondary twin model to provide
information about the mechanisms orienting a new primary axis when each cell is only a
small portion of the whole body – a much different topology than the holoblastic cleavage of
the original frog embryo.

Numerous studies have used the conjoined twin to probe late mechanisms for establishing
LR asymmetry (Nascone and Mercola, 1997; Vandenberg and Levin, 2010a; Beyer et al.,
2012; Vandenberg and Levin, 2012). Prior work revealed that organizers induced past the
first few cleavages can only orient the LR axis correctly when an original axis (the primary
twin) is already present elsewhere in the embryo (Vandenberg and Levin, 2010a). This is the
"big brother effect", in which late-induced twins must pick up LR orientation information
from original organizers. Planar cell polarity and apical basal polarity proteins are required
for this instructive process (Vandenberg and Levin, 2012). The need for an organizer that
had the benefit of early cleavage mechanisms for their LR determination to enable a later
organizer to properly orient itself highlights the importance of early cleavage events, which
are essential for correct LR orientation.

It is not known how many of the mechanisms by which early chiral information
is converted into multicellular asymmetric gene expression are operational during late
organizer induction. Here, we have used the conjoined twin model to determine whether
the mechanisms that operate during early cleavage stages also participate in orienting the LR
axis when an organizer arises de-novo in a multi-cellular field. Our results, using reagents
that do not affect asymmetry processes in a primary organizer at the time at which the
secondary twin is forming, reveal that some, but not all, of these mechanisms are indeed
required to orient the LR axis in the context of thousands of cells. Moreover, we report that
transcriptional asymmetries are established prior to the initiation of ciliary flow, confirming
the unique functions of the earliest stages of development for LR asymmetry.


[PAGE 4] Results
Chemical agents disrupt LR patterning in singletons early, but not late
Inverse drug screens (and the subsequent gene-specific validations) have previously
implicated K+ channels, H+ pumps, gap junctional communication (GJC) and serotonin
(5-HT) in the early orientation of the LR axis in Xenopus (Adams and Levin, 2006). We
first tested reagents that target these mechanisms in singleton embryos, to confirm which
ones randomized asymmetry (Fig. 1) when used early (exposure starting at 1-cell) but did
not disrupt LR patterning when exposures start at blastula stage (stage 8). We specifically
wanted to identify reagents that are effective early but not later, so that we could use
them to probe the mechanisms of secondary organizer LR patterning without concerns
that they would interfere with any laterality functions of the primary organizer (Fig. 2).
We identified treatments for all four targets (K+ channels, H⁺ pumps, GJC and 5-HT
signaling) that disrupted LR patterning in singletons when used early, but not later (Table 1).
These reagents were then used to determine whether their targets were also utilized in LR
patterning of a secondary organizer occurring in the context of an existing blastula.

Disrupting H+ or K+ signaling does not affect LR patterning in conjoined twins
Singleton embryos incubated at pH 4.0 starting from the 1-cell stage have randomized
LR patterning because such low extracellular pH interferes with the normal proton efflux
from right side cells (Levin et al., 2002; Adams et al., 2006; Aw et al., 2008); however,
incubations in pH 4.0 medium that start at stage 8 have no effect on LR patterning in
singletons (Table 1), confirming this procedure as targeting only very early phases of LR
asymmetry. To test the impact of altered H⁺ signaling on LR patterning in conjoined twins,
embryos were injected with XSiamois and then incubated in 0.1x MMR, pH 4.0 starting
from stage 8. We found no effect of low pH MMR on the incidence of heterotaxia in the
induced twin (Fig. 3A), suggesting that H+ efflux is not necessary for proper LR orientation
of a primary axis initiated at later stages.

Similarly, singleton embryos incubated in 4–40 mM BaCl have randomized LR axes when
treatments start at the 1-cell stage (due to blockade of potassium channels), but normal
LR development when exposures begin at stage 8 (Table 1). To test the effects of altered
K+ signaling on LR patterning in conjoined twins, twins were induced by XSiamois and
embryos were treated with BaCl starting from stage 8. Altered LR patterning was not
observed in the induced twin axes (Fig. 3A), indicating that K+ signaling is also not required
for LR patterning of primary axes induced at later stages. We conclude that the process by
which secondary organizers derive LR information utilizes neither K+ nor proton effluxes.

Pharmacological and molecular genetic loss-of-function assays implicate GJC in LR
patterning in late-induced organizers
We next examined the role of gap junctional communication. Singleton embryos treated
with lindane (a gap junction blocker (Guan and Ruch, 1996; Li and Mather, 1997; Levin
and Mercola, 1998)) starting from the 1-cell stage exhibited randomized LR patterning, but
incubations that started at stage 8 had no effect on LR patterning in singletons (Table 1).
To test the role of GJC in LR patterning of conjoined twins, embryos were injected with


[PAGE 5] 
XSiamois to induce left-sided twins and then incubated in lindane starting from stage 8. In
contrast to what was observed for treatments targeting H+ and K+ signaling, disruption of
GJC via treatment with lindane induced heterotaxia in 30% of the induced twins (Fig. 3B).
To confirm this pharmacological result with a gene-specific molecular reagent, embryos
were injected with XSiamois and H7 mRNA, a dominant negative form of a chimeric
connexin that efficiently disrupts GJC in Xenopus (Paul et al., 1995; Levin and Mercola,
1998). When H7 mRNA was introduced into two distinct blastomeres anywhere in the
top two tiers of the animal pole (Fig. 3C), 31% of induced twins that were produced
from these treatments exhibited randomized heart situs (Fig. 3D). To determine whether
proper GJC was needed in the blastomeres that would contribute to the primary organizer,
H7 was targeted only to two dorsal blastomeres (Fig. 3C). Again, the induced twins had
randomized LR axes (Fig. 3D). These results indicate that GJC is required to achieve proper
LR patterning in conjoined twins, suggesting that connexin-mediated communication plays
a role in the orientation of the LR axis of late-induced organizers (Vandenberg and Levin,
2012).

Disruption of 5-HT signaling alters LR patterning in conjoined twins
Singleton embryos treated with 10 µM tropisetron, a 5-HT receptor 3 antagonist (Kutz,
1993; Monge et al., 1993), had randomized LR patterning when exposures started at the
1-cell stage but not when exposures started at stage 8 (Table 1). To test the effect of
altered 5-HT signaling on LR patterning in conjoined twins, embryos were injected with
XSiamois and then incubated in 10 µM tropisetron starting from stage 8. The induced
twins exposed to the drug exhibited significant increases in inverted heart situs compared
to twins that were not exposed to tropisetron (Fig. 3E). Similarly, singleton embryos
treated with 15 μΜ fluoxetine, a selective 5-HT reuptake inhibitor that alters the amount
of available intracellular 5-HT (Fukumoto et al., 2005a), had randomized LR asymmetry
only when exposures occurred early (Table 1). When induced conjoined twins were exposed
to fluoxetine starting from stage 8, there was a significant increase in heterotaxia (Fig.
3E). These results implicate serotonergic signaling specifically in the LR patterning of
late-induced organizers.

To verify these pharmacological loss-of-function results with molecular genetic specificity,
8- or 16-cell embryos were co-injected with XSiamois and mRNA encoding amine binding
protein (ABP), a protein that binds, sequesters and inactivates 5-HT (Andersen et al., 2003;
Fukumoto et al., 2005b). When 5-HT signaling was specifically reduced in the blastomeres
that contributed to the induced twin, heterotaxia was observed (Fig. 3E). These results
validate the pharmacological data, and indicate that 5-HT signaling is required for proper
orientation of the LR axis in the complex body plan of the conjoined twin.

To better probe the spatial and temporal role of 5-HT in LR patterning in conjoined twins,
we employed a caged 5-HT molecule, BHQ-O-5HT, which releases 5-HT after molecular
uncaging via exposure to light (Rea et al., 2013). Releasing 5-HT from BHQ-O-5HT at the
32-cell stage randomizes the LR axis in singleton embryos, but uncaging at stage 8 has no
significant effect on the LR axis of singletons (Fig. 4A), confirming this as a reagent that
can be used to specifically target the instructive phase of organizer patterning. To further
probe the temporal role of 5-HT in LR patterning of late-induced organizers, BHQ-O-5HT
was injected into the apical-most point of the 1-cell embryo, followed by injection with
XSiamois at the 8- or 16-cell stage to induce conjoined twins. When BHQ-O-5HT was
activated at the 32-cell stage, LR defects were observed in conjoined twins, similar to what
was observed in singletons (Fig. 4B). When 5-HT was photochemically released beginning
at stage 8, relatively high rates of heterotaxia were observed in conjoined twins, a contrast to
the normal LR axes typical of singletons treated in the same way (Fig. 4B). A second subset
of embryos was co-injected with BHQ-O-5HT and XSiamois, limiting the localization of the
caged 5-HT molecule to the cells that would contribute to the induced twin. When 5-HT
was released at either 32-cell or at stage 8, significant levels of heterotaxia were observed
in the induced twin (Fig. 4C). Even uncaging as late as stage 10 was able to randomize
LR patterning in conjoined twins (Fig. 4C). In summary, results using this novel reagent
provided temporal control to probe the role of 5-HT throughout the embryo or in just those
blastomeres that contributed to the induced twin. This caged 5-HT molecule revealed a
role for 5-HT in orienting the LR axis of the late-induced conjoined twin, and specifically
implicate this molecule during late stages as the induced twin begins to develop with the
onset of zygotic transcription.


[PAGE 6] Identification of novel LR-biased transcripts in the developing embryo
Our data demonstrate that GJC and 5-HT play a role in the LR specification of
conjoined twins. Prior results indicated that serotonergic signaling through intracellular
(gap-junctional) paths impinged on asymmetric Nodal transcription through epigenetic
repression mediated by the Mad3-HDAC1 complex (Carneiro et al., 2011). However,
many hours separate the activity of the serotonin/GJC system from the eventual left-sided
expression of Nodal. What transcriptional events may underlie LR patterning downstream of
serotonergic signaling but prior to late steps such as ciliary function and Nodal expression?
To identify mRNAs that are asymmetrically expressed during this developmental period (i.e.
after cleavage stages but prior to the onset of ciliary flow), we performed a preliminary
microarray analysis comparing gene expression levels between the (pooled, N=50) right
and left sides of stage 13 Xenopus embryos (prior to GRP function which begins at stages
14-15). Out of approximately 29,000 transcripts represented in the array, about 1.3% were
known genes with a significant bias. We identified 33 genes with at least a 2-fold higher
expression level on the left side of the embryo, 314 with at least a 2-fold higher expression
level on the right side of the embryo, 6 transcripts which were detectable only on the left
side, and 48 transcripts which were detectable only on the right side (Supplemental Table 1).
While functional roles for these targets in LR asymmetry remain to be tested, the data reveal
clear asymmetries in transcriptomic profile of the L and R sides before ciliary flow begins. It
should be noted that the data contain novel targets, as well as those implicated by prior work
in the LR asymmetry field in a number of species, such as Sonic hedgehog (Levin et al.,
1995), collagen (Trelstad and Coulombre, 1971; Heacock and Agranoff, 1977; Bergmann et
al., 1998), and dynein (Supp et al., 1997; Armakolas and Klar, 2007).
While microarray measurements are inherently more sensitive than the non-quantitative
chromogenic in situ hybridization that is often used to look for asymmetric gene expression,
we did examine the expression of one gene of interest, the most highly-expressed Left-only
mRNA (collagen9A2) by whole mount in situ hybridization (WISH) analysis at stage 12 and
13. This transcript was also of particular interest because collagen is known to be regulated
by both serotonergic signaling (Highton and Garrett, 1963; Kasho et al., 1998) and gap
junction-mediated signaling (Moyer et al., 2004; Ehrlich et al., 2006). The WISH results
corroborated the microarray data, revealing expression only on the left side of the embryo
(n=14) or with an extremely strong left bias (n=4) (Fig. 5 A,B). As a negative control we
also used an anti-sense probe for XSlug, a gene that was not identified as left-right biased
in in the microarray, and saw the expected symmetric expression in all embryos (n=36,
Fig. 5C). Taken together, these results identify a number of additional candidate targets to
be functionally tested downstream of the serotonergic and gap junctional communication
system in Xenopus, and reveal that asymmetric transcription already exists prior to ciliary
flow.


[PAGE 7] Discussion
Xenopus has proven to be a valuable model to understand the mechanisms responsible for
orienting the LR axis due to the plethora of molecular-genetic reagents available, their ease
of use for pharmaceutical exposures, the availability of large numbers of embryos, and their
well-characterized cell lineages (Yost, 1998; Aw and Levin, 2008; Blum et al., 2009). In
fact, a large number of studies using pharmacological and molecular genetic loss-of-function
reagents have helped to elucidate the steps involved in orienting the LR axis in this species
(Yost, 1990; Hyatt and Yost, 1998; Levin and Mercola, 1998; Kramer et al., 2002; Levin, 2003; Qiu et al., 2005; Adams et al., 2006; Schweickert et al., 2007; Vandenberg et al., 2013c; Walentek et al., 2012).  Although much of the work in Xenopus has focused on early mechanisms, the conjoined twin model offers a unique opportunity to examine the mechanisms involved in orienting the LR axis when an organizer arises de novo in a multicellular context (Nascone and Mercola, 1997; Vandenberg and Levin, 2010a; Vandenberg and Levin, 2012).

[PAGE 8]
Our goal was to identify which mechanisms that are used in early LR patterning can also
be used by late organizers induced in a multi-cellular context. To achieve this, we used
perturbations that affect the patterning of the 2nd organizer after stage 8 (blastula) but
specifically do not affect LR patterning processes in the primary embryo at this time-point
(Fig. 2). Our results using pharmacological and molecular-genetic reagents revealed that
proton and potassium transport are dispensable (Fig. 3A), but GJC and 5-HT are both
necessary for LR patterning in conjoined twins (Fig. 3 B,D,E). Importantly, heart situs in
the primary twin was randomized to a similar degree in all treatment groups (data not
shown); Nascone & Mercola reported this same phenomenon in their original experiments
of conjoined twins, and determined that this was due to the late action of leaky morphogens
from the induced twin (Levin and Nascone, 1997; Nascone and Mercola, 1997).

Our results also reveal a novel instructive role for 5-HT during late axis specification. It
was recently suggested that 5-HT has permissive roles in the formation of ciliated tissues
during GRP formation (Beyer et al., 2012), acting as a competence factor rather than having
an instructive role during orientation of the LR axis. This hypothesis is contradicted by the observation that misexpression of 5-HT on the right side induces heterotaxia (Fukumoto et al., 2003; Fukumoto et al., 2005a; Fukumoto et al., 2005b; Rea et al., 2013; Vandenberg et al., 2013b). Here, we have used caged serotonin molecules to show that abnormal expression of 5-HT as late as stage 10 randomized LR patterning in conjoined twins (Fig. 4). Randomized LR axes were observed when reagents were targeted to the entire embryo (1-cell injection of caged 5-HT), to the primary twin (dorsal injections of H7), or to the induced twin (ventral injections of caged 5-HT and ventral injections of ABP), consistent with the need for embryo-wide transfer of serotonin-mediated instructive information during late LR patterning.


[PAGE 9] 
Our current and previous work implicates a number of physiological pathways involved
in the establishment of the LR axis, both in wild type embryos and in induced twins. In
regulating the cell behavior that gives rise to asymmetric organogenesis, these pathways
must affect gene expression. As a first step in identifying transcriptional targets functioning
earlier than Nodal (in addition to the epigenetic silencing previously characterized (Carneiro
et al., 2011)), and to test our hypothesis that asymmetric transcription begins prior to
appearance of the ciliated node, we performed a microarray analysis comparing the right
and left halves of stage 13 embryos and identified 401 transcripts exhibiting a lateralized
expression bias. As noted previously for asymmetric maternal proteins (Levin et al., 2002;
Qiu et al., 2005; Adams et al., 2006; Lobikin et al., 2012a), the lateralized transcripts were
much more heavily associated with the right side. Overall, these genes represent a number
of diverse families, many of which have not been previously implicated in the specification
of LR asymmetry. In situ hybridization for collagen9a2, a transcript identified as expressed
on the left side only by the genechip, corroborated the microarray data, showed strongly
left biased expression in all of the embryos examined. This result is exciting, as both GJC
and 5-HT have been shown to affect collagen synthesis in other model systems (Highton
and Garrett, 1963; Kasho et al., 1998; Moyer et al., 2004; Ehrlich et al., 2006; Young et al.,
2009). Moreover, collagen is already implicated in LR patterning of structures in C. elegans
(Bergmann et al., 1998) and chick (Trelstad and Coulombre, 1971), confirming the deep
conservation of LR mechanisms among diverse phyla that was recently shown using tubulin
modifications (Lobikin et al., 2012a). While future studies will probe the functional roles
of these asymmetric transcripts in the causal chain leading from asymmetric physiology to
left-sided genes such as Nodal, our results are consistent with prior studies indicating that
molecular asymmetry is established very early during development and is not limited to
maternal protein (Danilchik et al., 2006; Lobikin et al., 2012a).


[PAGE 9] Conclusions
We have used the conjoined twin model to examine the mechanisms involved in orienting the LR axis in a late-induced organizer. The data reveal that both GJC and 5-HT signaling are required for this instructive influence, but that potassium and proton efflux is not, and that a number of interesting genes are asymmetrically transcribed during these timepoints, prior to initiation of ciliary flow. Our previous studies of conjoined twins revealed a role for polarity proteins, including apical-basal and planar cell polarity proteins, in the orientation of the LR axis (Vandenberg and Levin, 2012). We propose a model whereby the polarity proteins align the cells in the blastoderm, enabling signaling molecules, including 5-HT, to pass through a series of open gap junctions from the primary to the secondary organizer.


[PAGE 10] Materials and Methods
Animal rearing
Xenopus laevis embryos were collected and fertilized in vitro following standard protocols (Sive et al., 2000). Embryos were maintained in 0.1x Modified Marc's Ringers (MMR) pH 7.8 at 14-20°C in laboratory incubators and staged according to (Nieuwkoop and Faber, 1967). All experiments were approved by the Animal Care and Use Committee at Tufts University and were conducted according to the Guidelines for the Care and Use for Laboratory Animals.

[PAGE 10] Microarray
At Nieuwkoop and Faber stage 13, embryos were bisected into right and left halves with a scalpel, transferred into separate Eppendorf micro-centrifuge tubes, and immediately frozen at -80°C. A total of 50 embryos, resulting from a combination of eggs from three mothers, were pooled for analysis. Only embryos with completely normal external development were used. RNA extraction and microarray analysis were performed by the Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center Genomics Core using a GeneChip Xenopus laevis genome 2.0 array (Affymetrix, Santa Clara, CA) following the standard Affymetrix protocol. Following expression analysis, a database was built from all resulting transcription levels comparing the right and left embryo samples. From this database, individual genes were removed if reported expression levels were not above those of background levels for the genechip, as were any genes which did not show at least a 2-fold increase vs. that of the opposite side.

[PAGE 10] Microinjection of molecular constructs
For induction of conjoined twins, XSiamois mRNA was injected into a left ventral vegetal blastomere at the 8- or 16-cell stage (Nascone and Mercola, 1997). Only twins with two fully developed hearts and mostly complete heads, were used in these experiments (Vandenberg and Levin, 2012). Incomplete twins, including those with microcephaly and abnormal notochord extension, were assessed separately to ensure that slight anterior-posterior or dorsal-ventral defects that could not be detected in the complete twins were not confounding results. No differences were observed in complete versus incomplete twins for any treatment.

A number of additional molecular constructs were used in these experiments including amine binding protein (ABP), a protein that binds, sequesters and inactivates 5-HT (Fukumoto et al., 2005b), and H7, a dominant negative form of a chimeric connexin that disrupts GJC in Xenopus (Paul et al., 1995; Levin and Mercola, 1998). For all microinjections of mRNA constructs, capped synthetic mRNAs (Sive et al., 2000) were

[PAGE 11] dissolved in water containing a lineage tracer and injected into embryos in 3% Ficoll using standard methods (50–100 msec pulses with borosilicate glass needles calibrated for a bubble pressure of 50–70 kPa in water). Volumes of 2–7 nl were injected per blastomere for all constructs. Injections were performed at the specified stage and were typically targeted to specific blastomeres. All injections were tested in at least 3 different mothers on at least 2 different days.

The Xenopus oocyte is a standard model for expressing exogenous proteins (such as ion channels) via mRNA microinjection. To verify that our in vitro transcribed mRNA was intact and resulted in the production of functional proteins, in a small subset of experiments, mRNA encoding β-galactosidase (β-gal) was co-injected with other mRNAs in embryos where twins were induced. Embryos were fixed at gastrula or neurula stages, washed, and stained with X-gal (Roche Applied Sciences, Indianapolis, IN) at 37°C. β-gal was observed in gastrula and neurula stages with different expression patterns depending on where injections were localized (see Supplementary Fig. S1).

[PAGE 11] Drug and chemical treatment
Xenopus embryos were treated with chemical reagents that have previously been demonstrated to affect LR patterning (Table 1). Embryos were split into three batches: untreated controls, early treatments, and late treatments. Early treatment embryos were exposed to a single chemical from 1-cell through neurula stages (Nieuwkoop & Faber stages 19-22). Late treatment embryos were maintained in 0.1x MMR until stage 8, when they were transferred to fresh solutions containing a single chemical. These embryos were maintained in the chemical until neurula stages, then washed repeatedly in 0.1x MMR and housed in clean 0.1x MMR until stage 45. Concentrations previously identified as effective were tested, as well as higher and lower concentrations, to determine the most effective concentration at disrupting LR patterning without excessive toxicity (determined by mortality and other defects not related to LR patterning.) Only concentrations with toxicity <20% were used in these experiments.

[PAGE 11] Drug and chemical treatment of conjoined twins
Following the injection of XSiamois at the 8- or 16-cell stage, embryos were maintained in 0.1x MMR until stage 8, and then transferred to fresh solutions containing effective concentrations of each chemical. Embryos were incubated in the chemical until neurula stages, then washed repeatedly in 0.1x MMR and maintained in clean 0.1x MMR until stage 45. Concentrations are indicated in Table 1. All drugs/chemicals were tested in at least 2 different batches with embryos from at least 3 different mothers.

[PAGE 11] Caged serotonin
One group of embryos was injected with approximately 50 ng BHQ-O-5HT at the 1-cell stage, and a subset of this group was injected with XSiamois mRNA at the 8- to 16-cell stage. A second group of embryos was co-injected with approximately 50 ng BHQ-O-5HT and XSiamois mRNA at the 8- to 16-cell stage. All injections were performed under dark conditions and embryos were housed in 0.1x MMR in the dark. Embryos injected with BHQ-O-5HT were exposed to a broad spectrum lamp for one hour starting at the 32-cell

[PAGE 12] stage, stage 8 or at stage 10 to uncage the molecule and release 5-HT (Rea et al., 2013); these embryos were then returned to the dark for the remainder of the experiment.

[PAGE 12] Laterality assay
At stage 45, singleton embryos were analyzed for position (situs) of the heart, stomach, and gall bladder according to (Levin and Mercola, 1998). Heterotaxia was defined as the reversal in position of one or more organs. Only embryos with a normal dorso-anterior index (DAI 5) were scored to prevent confounding of randomization caused by midline defects (Danos and Yost, 1995). Conjoined twins were also analyzed at stage 45 for situs of the heart for both twins and situs of the shared stomach and gall bladder (Vandenberg and Levin, 2010a). Because of the abnormal position of the heart in some twins, situs was always scored when the heart was beating to allow definitive determination of the heart orientation. For both singleton embryos and conjoined twins, percent heterotaxia was calculated as the absolute number of heterotaxic tadpoles divided by the total number of scorable tadpoles. A Chi Square test with Pearson correction for increased stringency was used