Impact of the Xenopus system on the missions of the NIMH
Michael Levin, PhD – Tufts University
Peter S. Klein, MD, PhD – University of Pennsylvania

Contributions of research in Xenopus to the understanding of major psychiatric and
neurodegenerative disorders: The Xenopus system has led to, and continues to lead to,
fundamental advances in understanding the mechanisms of mood stabilizing drugs. Lithium is
the most effective and widely used treatment for bipolar disorder, a mood disorder that affects
more than 2 million Americans and more than 50 million people worldwide, and yet the
mechanism of lithium action remains uncertain. Lithium also disrupts the early development of
Xenopus embryos, and this robust phenotype has been used extensively to explore the
molecular mechanisms of lithium action. One of the most actively investigated mechanisms for
lithium action is the inositol depletion hypothesis, and some of the strongest and most frequently
cited support for this hypothesis comes from seminal papers using Xenopus, including the
classic work from Busa and Gimlich, who provided the strongest in vivo data to date showing
that exogenous inositol can reverse effects of lithium on phosphatidylinositol signaling. Their
findings provide a cornerstone of the inositol depletion hypothesis.

The NIMH also supports research in Xenopus that led to the discovery that lithium inhibits the
signaling kinase GSK-3 and thereby activates Wnt and neurotrophin/RTK signaling pathways.
This discovery provided a compelling alternative mechanism for the developmental effects of
lithium in Xenopus, directly led to extensive research on the role of GSK-3 in neuronal signaling
in mammalian systems, including humans, and led to clinical trials applying GSK-3 inhibitors for
neuropsychiatric and neurodegenerative disorders. NIMH funded research in Xenopus also led
to studies on lithium and GSK-3 in neuronal regeneration, mammalian behavior, Alzheimer's
disease, and other neuropsychiatric disease models.

NIMH funded research in Xenopus also directly contributed to the discovery that another widely
prescribed mood stabilizing and antiepileptic medication, valproic acid, is a direct inhibitor of
histone deacetylases (HDACs). These findings are immediately relevant to the mission of the
NIMH, but have also had an important impact on research outside the Institute's mandate,
including the development of over 40 clinical trials (see http://clinicaltrials.gov/ and search
"valproic acid”) using valproic acid to treat neurodegenerative, neuromuscular, and neoplastic
disorders, and potentially to activate latent HIV in the treatment of AIDS. Inhibition of HDACs
also provides a compelling molecular mechanism for the devastating birth defects associated
with the use of valproic acid in humans during pregnancy.

Future Directions for the use of Xenopus in research on signaling in psychiatric and
neurodegenerative disorders: Xenopus is an ideal system for future studies on the
mechanisms of mood stabilizer drug action, as Xenopus embryos and oocytes provide readily
accessible, in vivo systems to query the effects of both small molecules and gene products on
canonical signaling pathways, including Wnt, TGF-ẞ/BMP, and FGF pathways, that have been
worked out to a great extent in this model system. Xenopus oocytes are widely used vehicles for
the study of ion channels and G protein coupled receptors that mediate neurotransmitter
signaling, and have been one of the classical systems to study cell cycle regulators,
posttranscriptional regulation of RNA, and the analysis of small RNA species. Xenopus
embryos have been, and continue to be, an essential model system for characterizing the
molecular mechanisms of Wnt and TGFẞ signaling. As these pathways are now believed to be
important in the pathogenesis of major psychiatric disorders in humans, including schizophrenia
and bipolar disorder associated with mutations in the DISC1 gene, the Xenopus system will
remain an important tool to advance our basic understanding of mental illnesses and to
translate these basic discoveries to the treatment of psychiatric disorders.

[PAGE 2] Xenopus as a model for understanding neurodevelopment and behavior: Of high priority
to NIMH objectives is the mechanistic understanding of the links between genetics, nervous
system structure as established during embryogenesis, and behavior. Xenopus is an ideal
vertebrate model system for this purpose because it is uniquely amenable to state-of-the-art
functional approaches that target every step along the genetics-behavior axis.

Xenopus is a very popular system for neurodevelopmental studies, with a plethora of
information available on the molecular genetics of patterning of the CNS and peripheral
innervation. It is also very easy to perturb gene function via gain- and loss-of-function
approaches (morpholinos, RNAi, dominant negative and mutant construct misexpression).
Likewise, many of the antibodies and RNA probes revealing specific components of the sensory
and nervous systems are available and work well in Xenopus. Thus, not only are the mechanics
of neural structure being unraveled in this system, but any protein of interest (e.g., candidates
for human diseases or syndromes) can rapidly and inexpensively be tested. Because the frog
embryo can be manipulated from before fertilization, and completes all of its developmental
events in vitro, it is a model system in which every aspect of nervous system development and
behavior can be tracked (and modulated), from the earliest stages of neural induction through to
mature animal social behavior.

Moreover, Xenopus possesses unique advantages for this work. First, the
neurophysiology community routinely tests ion channel, neurotransmitter, and related proteins in
the Xenopus oocytes assay, which makes a huge toolkit of well-characterized constructs
available that have already been tested to a high level of mechanistic detail in this system
(Adams et al., 2006; Levin et al., 2002). This also means that not only can biophysical factors
(long-term transmembrane voltage gradients etc.) be studied in addition to secreted
factors/ECM, but pre-nervous and nervous morphogenetic roles of small molecule
neurotransmitters are readily addressed (Levin et al., 2006). Second, unlike in the zebrafish
embryo, early Xenopus blastomeres have a determined fate-map (Dale and Slack, 1987;
Moody, 1987), which means that specific regions of the nervous system can be targeted by
microinjection. For example, one can target one side of the brain with a specific mRNA leaving
the contralateral side of the animal as an internal control. This is particularly useful for
characterization of brain laterality (Wassersug et al., 1999; Wassersug and Yamashita, 2002), a
fascinating topic of high relevance to a number of NIMH priority areas.

Most importantly, Xenopus is a model system that provides unique opportunities in
cognitive science and ethology. Xenopus laevis larvae have been a popular behavioral system
for investigation of responses to light and gravity, in individual behaviors and schooling (Copp
and McKenzie, 1984; Jamieson and Roberts, 2000; Katz et al., 1981; Lum et al., 1982; Moriya
et al., 1996; Pronych et al., 1996; Roberts, 1978; Rot-Nikcevic and Wassersug, 2004;
Wassersug and Hessler, 1971). Unlike zebrafish and similar model systems, Xenopus tadpoles
exhibit complex and rich behavioral patterns as larvae, performing schooling and conspecific
recognition within 1 week of fertilization. Thus, Xenopus tadpoles can be analyzed for behavior,
sensory abilities, learning/memory, and social interactions. These are highly sophisticated
animals and yet are small enough to be easily amenable high-throughput automated behavioral
analysis technology (Hicks et al., 2006). Thus, the effects of neurotoxins, or putative nootropics
(drugs that augment memory or learning rate) can easily be characterized in animals that are
mutant, wild-type, or modified by mRNA microinjection or pharmacological treatments. Similarly,
the molecular basis of memory and learning pathways are readily addressed in Xenopus, since
the larvae are readily trained at many stages of development and amenable to surgical,
pharmacological, and genetic intervention.


[PAGE 3] Nearly all of the NIMH priority areas can be advanced significantly by segments of the
Xenopus community, due to this vertebrate model system's combination of accessibility to
molecular-genetic, biophysical, and pharmacological approaches and rich behavioral repertoire
that will help us with the exciting and biomedically-crucial task of understanding how
embryogenesis ultimately gives rise to coherent behavior and cognitive abilities.

[PAGE 5] Xenopus Grants funding by the NIMH
According to NIH REPORTER Search Tool, in the fiscal year of 2009, the National Institute of
Mental Health (NIMH) funded 10 grants for projects involving Xenopus. These grants total
$3,564,092. See appendix for a complete list.

[PAGE 5] 2009 Xenopus White Paper – Community Needs
Executive Summary

[PAGE 5] Xenopus - a crucial model organism for biomedical research:
Experiments in model animals are a cornerstone of biomedical research and have a
massive impact on our understanding of human health and disease. The frog, Xenopus, is a
widely used and crucial vertebrate model organism that offers a unique combination of three
powerful advantages: strong conservation of essential biological mechanisms, a remarkable
experimental repertoire, and unparalleled cost-effectiveness when compared to murine or other
mammalian models.

In fact, for many experimental applications, Xenopus is the only viable model system.
For example, in cell and molecular biology, Xenopus extracts allow for individual components of
the cell cycle or DNA replication/repair machinery to be analyzed in a manner that cannot be
recapitulated in vivo or in cell culture. For developmental biology, no other model system allows
for high-throughput genomic/proteomic screening and at the same time allows for
transplant/explant analysis (i.e. “experimental embryology”). The Xenopus oocyte is unique as a
system for studying channel physiology using the patch-clamp and as a system for protein
expression. Finally, Xenopus is the only vertebrate model that readily produces enough
biological material for biochemical purification from eggs, intact embryos, or isolated embryonic
tissues. The combination of these characteristics offers a wide range of experimental
opportunities for studies using the Xenopus system in contrast to other vertebrates such as the
mouse or zebrafish.

[PAGE 5] NIH Investment in Xenopus:
The NIH has made a substantial and continuing investment in Xenopus research.
Indeed, a search of the NIH rePORT database for R01's or equivalent grants using the search
term "Xenopus” returned 427 grants for a total cost of $127,583,776 for FY08 and FY09.
Despite this investment in individuals' research, the Xenopus community lacks many resources
that are considered entirely essential for other model systems, including a complete genome
sequence, stock and training centers, and a comprehensive model organism database.

[PAGE 5] Xenopus as a Model System and Human Disease:
Given the tremendous advantages of the Xenopus system, the pace of new biological
discovery by the Xenopus Community is brisk. Using Xenopus, we have significantly improved
our understanding of human disease genes and their mechanisms, justifying the NIH's
investment in Xenopus. Below we provide examples of just a few of the human health
discoveries made in the last two years:
Xenopus embryos are used for in vivo analysis of gene expression and function:
Nephronophthisis - Hum Mol Genet. 2008. 17, 3655-62; Nat Genet. 2005. 37, 537-43.
Cutis laxa - Nat Genet. 2009. 41, 1016-21.
Meckel-Gruber syndrome - Am J Hum Genet. 2008. 82, 959-70.
Colorectal cancer - Genome Res. 2009. 19, 987-93.

Xenopus egg extracts are used for in vitro biochemical studies:
Fanconi Anemia - Mol. Cell. 2009. 35, 704-15; J Biol Chem. 2009, 284, 25560-8.
C-myc oncogene - Nature. 2007. 448, 445-51.
BRCA1 - Cell. 2006. 127, 539-552
Xenopus oocytes are used to study gene expression and channel activity:
Trypanosome transmission - Nature 2009. 459, 213-217.
Epilepsy, ataxia, sensorineural deafness - N Engl J Med. 360, 1960-70.
Catastrophic cardiac arrhythmia (Long-QT syndrome) - PNAS 2009. 106,13082-7.
Megalencephalic leukoencephalopathy - Hum Mol Genet. 2008. 17, 3728-39.

Xenopus as a Model System and Basic Biological Processes:
Xenopus also plays a crucial role in elucidating the basic cellular and biochemical
mechanisms underlying the entire spectrum of human pathologies. Again only a few of the
many discoveries in the last two years are highlighted here:
Xenopus embryos were used for studies of TGF-® signal transduction.
(Cell. 2009. 136,123-35; Science. 2007. 315, 840-3).
Xenopus egg extracts revealed fundamental aspects of cell division.
(Nature. 2008. 453, 1132-6; Science. 2008. 319, 469-72).
Xenopus embryos were used for studying mucociliary epithelia.
(Nat Genet. 2008. 40, 871-9; Nature. 2007. 447, 97-101).
Xenopus embryos were used for studying development of the vasculature.
(Cell. 2008.135, 1053-64).
Xenopus egg extracts provided key insight into DNA damage responses.
(Mol Cell. 2009. 35,704-15; Cell. 2008. 134, 969-80).
Xenopus embryos linked telomerase to Wnt signaling.
(Nature. 2009. 460, 66-72).
Xenopus was used for small molecule screens to develop therapeutics.
(Nat Chem Biol. 2008. 4, 119-25; Blood. 2009. 114, 1110-22).


[PAGE 6] Immediate Needs of the Xenopus Community:
It is the consensus of the Xenopus community that their biomedical research could be
greatly accelerated by the development of key resources that are currently lacking. These
resources would be of use to the entire Xenopus research community. In this White Paper, the
community identifies seven resources in two categories: Three Immediate Needs and four
Essential Resources:

The Immediate Needs are a common set of key resources that were identified as the
most pressing by three committees established to identify needed resources across the broad
and diverse Xenopus community. There is a broad, community-wide consensus that these
resources would have an immediate impact on all Xenopus users and should be assigned the
highest priority in order to accelerate the pace of biomedical research using Xenopus as a
model system.

These Immediate Needs and the resulting improvements in biomedical research are as
follows:

1. Establishment of the Xenopus Resource and Training Center at the MBL in Woods Hole.
-Will allow rapid distribution of transgenic Xenopus laevis lines expressing fluorescent reporters and tagged
proteins (for example histone-RFP for visualizing the mitotic spindle or organ specific GFP in embryos)
-Will allow centralized generation, housing, and distribution of genetically modified X. tropicalis lines,
including both mutants and transgenics.
-Will allow both current investigators and the next generation of researchers to get hands-on training in
Xenopus-based biomedical research methods (including cell, molecular, and developmental methods).

2. Expansion and improvement of Xenbase, a Xenopus model organism database.
-Maintain and curate data for the essential primary database for Xenopus researchers.
-Enhance the functionality of Xenbase by introducing a phenotypes feature.
-Support new content on Xenbase, including proteomics support, a new genome browser, and Wiki for
Xenopus methods.
-Continue and expand collaborative and service efforts (e.g. provide Xenopus data to other databases
including NCBI, UniProtK, Mascot and Tornado).

3. Complete sequencing of the Xenopus laevis genome.
-Will allow the deconvolution of data in mass-spectrometry-based proteomic studies.
-Will facilitate identification of conserved gene regulatory regions to build gene-regulatory networks.
-Will facilitate site-specifc studies of DNA transaction (repair and replication)
-Will facilitate identification of all ORFs to build an ORFeome for rapid functional characterization of genes
-Will facilitate the design of morpholino oligonucleotides for gene depletion studies
-Will faciliate the analysis of chromatin-immunoprecipitations to identify DNA-bound to transcription factors
and DNA modifications.

[PAGE 7] Essential Resources Needed by the Xenopus Community:
In addition to these immediate, community-wide needs, the committees identified four
Essential Resources that should be developed as soon as possible, so that Xenopus biologists
can more effectively fulfill the missions of the NIH. The Xenopus community considers all four
of these additional resources to be essential, but understands that priorities must be set, and
ranks these behind the Immediate Needs. These Essential Resources are as follows:

4. Xenopus ORFeome in recombineering vectors.
5. Improvement of the X. tropicalis genome sequence and annotation
6. Development of methods for disrupting gene function in Xenopus.
7. Generation and Distribution of antibodies for Xenopus research.

[PAGE 7] Anticipated Gains for Biomedical Research:
Xenopus is a crucial model organism for biomedical research. With the development of
large-scale community-wide resources, Xenopus is poised to be become the premier vertebrate
model for systems-level approaches to understanding biological mechanisms in cell, molecular,
and developmental biology.

The National Research Council and the National Academy of Sciences have recently
called on the Unites States “to launch a new multiagency, multiyear, and multidisciplinary
initiative to capitalize on the extraordinary advances recently made in biology”. This report
(http://www.nap.edu/catalog.php?record_id=12764) recommends the term "new biology" to
describe an approach to research where “physicists, chemists, computer scientists, engineers,
mathematicians, and other scientists are integrated into the field of biology.” The promise of
systems-level analysis in Xenopus, combined with its already proven strengths, make Xenopus
the ideal model organism for pursuing this “new biology.”


Genome improvements will provide Xenopus researchers with the ability to perform
genome-wide screens for biological activities that will in turn allow the rapid assembly and
analysis of gene regulatory networks. The ORFeome will greatly facilitate such genome-wide
screening by allowing all ORFs to be rapidly analyzed or large numbers of proteins to be tagged
for analysis of protein-protein interaction or for in vivo visualization. Using extracts and
biochemical purification coupled with mass-spectrometry and genomic sequence, protein
interactomes can be rapidly identified and validated. Because Xenopus can be so easily
manipulated and because vast amounts of biological material can be generated, cell-type
specific interactomes can also be identified. Large-scale genetic screens will identify important
novel genes in developmental pathways, especially given the relatively simple genome of X.
tropicalis compared to zebrafish. Finally, the flexibility of both Xenopus extracts and embryos
make this system ideal for chemical biology screens. Identifying these gene-regulatory
networks, interactomes, and novel genes will be only the first steps, of course. The well-

[PAGE 8] For complete details of the 2009 Xenopus White Paper, please visit
http://www.xenbase.org/community/xenopuswhitepaper.do


established power of Xenopus for rapid analysis of gene function will then allow deeply
mechanistic analyses to complement the systems-level approaches described above.

It is the combination of these characteristics that distinguishes Xenopus from other
vertebrate model systems such as mouse and zebrafish and allows for a systems-level
approach to understanding biological mechanisms. The tremendous promise of the Xenopus
model cannot be realized, however, without the immediate development of community-wide
research resources. This White Paper presents the needed resources, and we look to the NIH
for guidance in how to best achieve these goals.


[PAGE 9] Appendix
Xenopus Grants funded by the NIMH

Project Number | Activity | Project Title | Principal Investigator | Organization | Total
---|---|---|---|---|---
1R03MH086789-01 | R03 | KV4.3 GATING CURRENT: MECHANISMS UNDERLYING CLOSED STATE INACTIVATION | CAMPBELL, DONALD LEROY | STATE UNIVERSITY OF NEW YORK AT BUFFALO | $77,439
5R01MH059937-10 | R01 | MOLECULAR PHYSIOLOGY OF MAMMALIAN INSP3 RECEPTOR | FOSKETT, J. KEVIN | UNIVERSITY OF PENNSYLVANIA | $300,573
1P50MH086383-01 | P50 | NICOTINIC CHOLINERGIC RECEPTOR AGONISTS | FREEDMAN, ROBERT R | UNIVERSITY OF COLORADO DENVER | $130,564
5R37MH065334-29 | R37 | GENETIC STUDIES OF THE SYNAPSE | JAN, LILY Y | UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA SAN FRANCISCO | $375,040
1U19MH085193-01A1 | U19 | DESIGN AND STUDY OF NEW NICOTINIC ANALOGS FOR USE IN DEPRESSION | KOZIKOWSKI, ALAN PAUL | UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT CHICAGO | $964,233
1R01MH081842-01A2 | R01 | AUTOMATED ANALYSIS OF LEARNING AND MEMORY FOR NEURO-DEVELOPMENTAL STUDIES | LEVIN, MICHAEL | TUFTS UNIVERSITY MEDFORD | $378,513
1R01MH079381-01A2 | R01 | TOL2-MEDIATED GENE AND ENHANCER TRAPPING IN XENOPUS TROPICALIS | MEAD, PAUL E | ST. JUDE CHILDREN'S RESEARCH HOSPITAL | $414,665
5R01MH060252-07 | R01 | CLEFT BINDING NMDA RECEPTOR SUBTYPE ANTAGONISTS | MONAGHAN, DANIEL T | UNIVERSITY OF NEBRASKA MEDICAL CENTER | $269,874
5R01MH074702-05 | R01 | MECHANISMS OF CALCIUM TRANSIENTS IN NEURONAL DEVELOPMENT | SPITZER, NICHOLAS C | UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA SAN DIEGO | $316,150
5R01MH071404-04 | R01 | NETRIN SIGNALING DURING NEURONAL DEVELOPMENT | STEIN, ELKE | YALE UNIVERSITY | $337,032

Total |  |  |  |  | $3,564,092