Dev Genes Evol (2006) 216: 265–276
DOI 10.1007/s00427-005-0051-6

ORIGINAL ARTICLE

Taku Hibino · Yuichiro Ishii ·
Michael Levin · Atsuo Nishino

Ion flow regulates left-right asymmetry
in sea urchin development

Received: 6 August 2005 / Accepted: 6 December 2005 / Published online: 14 March 2006
© Springer-Verlag 2006

Abstract The degree of conservation among phyla of
early mechanisms that pattern the left-right (LR) axis is
poorly understood. Larvae of sea urchins exhibit consis-
tently oriented LR asymmetry. The main part of the adult
rudiment is formed from the left coelomic sac of larvae, the
left hydrocoel. Although this left preference is conserved
among all echinoderm larvae, its mechanism is largely
not understood. Using two marker genes, HpNot and
HpFoxFQ-like, which are asymmetrically expressed during
larval development of the sea urchin Hemicentrotus
pulcherrimus, we examined in this study the possibility
that the recently discovered ion flux mechanism controls
asymmetry in sea urchins as it does in several vertebrate
species. Several ion-transporter inhibitors were screened
for the ability to alter the expression of the asymmetric
marker genes. Blockers of the H+/K+-ATPase (omeprazole,
lansoprazole and SCH28080), as well as a calcium iono-
phore (A23187), significantly altered the normal sidedness
of asymmetric gene expression. Exposure to omeprazole
disrupted the consistent asymmetry of adult rudiment for-
mation in larvae. Immuno-detection revealed that H+/K+-
ATPase-like antigens in sea urchin embryos were present
through blastula stage and exhibited a striking asymmetry
being present in a single blastomere in 32-cell embryos.
These results suggest that, as in vertebrates, endogenous
spatially-regulated early transport of H+ and/or K+, and
also of Ca2+, functions in the establishment of LR
asymmetry in sea urchin development.

Keywords Ion flux · Left-right asymmetry · Sea urchin ·
Embryogenesis · Adult rudiment


[PAGE 2] Introduction

Consistent asymmetries of organs, such as the heart and
viscera, are overlaid upon the bilateral architecture of many
animal phyla. Molecular mechanisms which establish LR
asymmetry have been intensively investigated in vertebrate
model organisms (Hamada et al. 2002; Mercola 2003; Cooke
2004; Levin 2005). Recent studies revealed a conserved
regulatory cascade where a TGF-β factor, Nodal, is ex-
pressed in the left lateral mesoderm and positively controls
the expression of the Pitx2 gene, which functions to place
the visceral organs with precise orientation (Ryan et al.
1998). However, the initial step for breaking the LR
symmetry and early mechanisms that establish consistently
asymmetric gene expression are less well-understood. One
model, based on data in rodent embryos, proposes that
monocilia located in the node beat to propel the fluid
containing possible determinant(s) to direct it to the left side
(Nonaka et al. 1998, 2002; Tanaka et al. 2005); it has also
been proposed that mechano-sensitive cells flanking the
region of motile cilia sense the flow leading to an
asymmetric calcium signaling (McGrath et al. 2003).
While a comparable mechanism was reported in fish
(Kramer-Zucker et al. 2005; Okada et al. 2005), data from
other vertebrate models, the frog and chick, have suggested
alternative mechanisms upstream of asymmetric gene ex-
pressions (Levin and Nascone 1997; Levin 2003, 2004a).
Levin et al. demonstrated that a side-specific membrane
hyperpolarization produced by the localized activity of the
H+/K+-ATPase (H,K-ATPase) plays a critical role in LR
patterning (Levin et al. 2002). This mechanism may control
downstream events either through directly regulating sig-
naling steps by altering steady-state membrane voltage
levels, or by using the induced electrophoretic force to
move as yet unidentified determinant(s) to a specific loca-
tion around the midline. Another recent study suggested
that Notch signaling is activated through a localized
elevation of extracellular calcium concentration induced
by a side-specific activity of H,K-ATPase (Raya et al.
2004). The degree of evolutionary conservation of these
mechanisms among phyla, and their relevance in inverte-
brates, are an important current controversy (Boorman and
Shimeld 2002; Cooke 2004).

Echinoderms, marine invertebrates including sea urchins
and other pentameral organisms, show conspicuous LR
asymmetry during their development. Most species ini-
tially develop from eggs into apparently bilateral plankto-
trophic larvae, and later metamorphose into five-rayed
spiny-skinned adults (Peterson et al. 2000). During the late
larval stage, a rudiment of the adult body is formed
specifically on the left side of the larva. In sea urchins, the
adult rudiment is differentiated from a left coelomic sac
and the vestibular ectoderm; the former originates from the
left mesodermal pouch pinched off from the archenteron
tip, and the latter is derived from an invagination of a part
of the oral ectoderm. The determination mechanisms have
become clearer at a molecular level for the primary
(animal-vegetal or anterior-posterior) axis (Logan et al.
1999; Weitzel et al. 2004), and also for the oral-aboral axis
(Coffman et al. 2004; Duboc et al. 2004). The mechanism
establishing asymmetry along the third axis, the LR axis,
however, remains to be understood. Recently, a series of
manipulation experiments in sea urchin embryos demon-
strated that the ability to form the left adult rudiment is
committed from gastrula to prism stages by an influence
directed by a restricted part of the right side (Aihara and
Amemiya 2000, 2001).

In this study, we address the molecular basis for this
mechanism and characterize a novel aspect of LR asym-
metry in sea urchin development. To test the hypothesis
that ion flux is involved in breakage of LR symmetry of
echinoid embryos, we performed a pharmacological screen
using a set of compounds that modulate ionic flow (Adams
and Levin 2005). Blockers of H,K-ATPase activity and a
calcium ionophore significantly destabilized the normal LR
asymmetry of the expression patterns of two molecular
markers (as reported in abstract form in Ishii et al. 2003).
Guided by these data, we characterized the localization of
the H,K-ATPase in early sea urchin embryos, which
revealed a strikingly asymmetric pattern at the protein
level, revealing a deep similarity to early localization in
vertebrates. Our analyses suggest that, as in chick and frog
(Levin et al. 2002; Raya et al. 2004), an asymmetrically
localized regulation of ion flux involving H+ and/or K+ is
established from early embryonic stages and has an
essential role for breakage of LR symmetry; moreover,
the precise control of calcium flux is also required for
determining asymmetry. Our results on endogenous local-
ization and loss of function, together with the very recent
finding (Duboc et al. 2005) that asymmetry can also be
disrupted with an H,K-ATPase inhibitor in a Mediterranean
sea urchin, Paracentrotus lividus, suggest that the early ion
flux-dependent mechanism in LR patterning operates
widely in echinoid lineage (Ishii et al. 2003; Duboc et al.
2005).


[PAGE 2] Materials and methods

Animals and embryos

Adults of the Japanese sea urchin, Hemicentrotus pulcher-
rimus, were collected at rocky shores in Ooarai (Ibaraki,
Japan), Asamushi (Aomori, Japan), and Tateyama (Chiba,
Japan). Eggs and sperm were obtained by injection of 100-
mM acetylcholine chloride in the artificial seawater
(“Jamarin U” artificial seawater, JSW, Jamarin Laboratory,
Osaka, Japan) into the body cavity. After washes with JSW,
eggs were inseminated with suspended sperm.

Pharmacological screening

Each compound (listed in Table 1) was dissolved in JSW,
in which fertilized eggs were then reared to two-armed
pluteus stage at about 18°C. We first prepared a series with
graded concentrations for determining the appropriate
concentration. While the batches displayed a variable
response, we were able to define an appropriate concen-
tration range for each compound at which the dissolved
chemical did not disrupt the normal appearance of
development until two-armed pluteus stage; the larvae
retained a bilateral configuration with a well-shaped gut
and skeletal rods (Table 1). It has been reported that
treatment with A23187 is able to induce the formation of
right-sided or bilateral adult rudiments (Fujiwara et al.
1997), and its treatment at a high dose, 2 µM, can also
disrupt the oral-aboral axis specification and produce
exogastrulae at a high incidence (Akasaka et al. 1997). We
selected a dose for this compound that does not disrupt the
normal gastrulation pattern (Table 1), and the exogastrulae
formed occasionally were excluded from the further
analyses. The normal specification of oral-aboral terri-
tories was confirmed by stomodeum development and the
oral-sided expression of HpNot. This treatment disrupted
the normally consistent sidedness of gene expression
patterns at concentrations comparable to, and not more
than fivefold greater than, those used in vertebrate
experiments (see Results) (Toyoizumi et al. 1997; Levin
et al. 2002; Asano et al. 2004). In each case, the final
concentration level of DMSO (used as vehicle for
compounds other than lanthanum chloride due to their
insolubility directly into water) was less than 0.4%. Sta-
tistical analysis was performed using the chi-squared test.
The numbers of larvae with particular gene expression
pattern shown in Fig. 2 were calculated to determine p
values. The 2×2 matrices were prepared from the numbers
of larvae retaining the normal side-specificity (namely, R
and TR patterns for HpNot expression in Fig. 2C) and
larvae with other patterns from each treatment vs those
from the negative control. Negative control embryos for
lanthanum chloride were exposed to JSW only, while 1%
DMSO treatment was used as a negative control treatment
for the other compounds.

To examine the side-specificity of adult rudiment for-
mation, treated larvae were reared according to the method
described (Amemiya 1996), within 50-ml plastic tubes
containing JSW (~60 larvae/50 ml) fixed on a rotator for
2 weeks. They were fed with cultured diatoms, Chaeto-
ceros gracilis and/or C. calcitrans (the latter is commer-
cially supplied as “sunculture”, Nisshin Marinetech,
Yokohama, Japan). The growth of larvae was examined
once every 3 days, and after the examination the larvae
were transferred into a new suspension of diatoms. The
larvae aged up to eight-armed pluteus after 2 weeks were
observed under a binocular dissection microscope to
determine the side on which adult rudiment formed.
Sometimes, vestibular invagination was found without
any evident adult organs derived from the coelom. In such
cases, the side of the vestibule was assessed and
categorized into ‘L (or R) vestibule only’. For statistics,
a chi-squared test was performed with the counts of larvae
with normal side specificity (namely, L and l.v. patterns)
and larvae with other patterns. Larvae were photographed
from the aboral side under a light microscope (Fig. 3).

[PAGE 3] Alkaline phosphatase histochemistry

The expression of alkaline phosphatase (APase) histo-
activity has been regarded as a differentiation marker for
the endoderm of echinoid larvae. The expression of APase
is known to start in H. pulcherrimus about 30 h of post-
fertilization (hpf) at 18°C (Hamada and Kiyomoto 2003).
The omeprazole treated and non-treated prism larvae at
30.5, 32.5, 34.5, and 36.5 hpf were fixed by 4%
paraformaldehyde in 0.1 M MOPS (pH 7.5), 0.5 M
NaCl for 10 min at room temperature, followed by several
washes with APase buffer (100 mM Tris-Cl pH 9.5,
100 mM NaCl, 5 mM MgCl2). The fixed larvae were
stained by adding 20 µl/ml nitroblue tetrazolium/bromo-
chloro-indolyl phosphate (NBT/BCIP) stock solution
(supplied in DIG DNA labeling and detection kit,
Roche) in APase buffer for 30 min in the dark at room
temperature. The coloring reaction was stopped by a wash
with PBT (phosphate buffered saline containing 0.1%
Tween-20). The stained larvae were photographed under a
light microscope (Axioplan 2, Zeiss) and a digital photo
system (DC300FX, Leica) with constant digital param-
eters. The incorporated RGB color images were converted
into 8-bit gray-scale pict files by Photoshop 7.0, and then
analyzed using NIH image 1.63 run on a G3 Macintosh
computer. The region of interest (ROI) was defined to
include the gut region of a randomly selected larva, and
the maximum pixel value (at most, 255=black) in the ROI
was taken to represent the APase expression level. The
average of the values from 20 individuals was defined as
“APase expression index", and the indices were compared
with samples from different sampling stages and different
treatment conditions (see Supplementary Fig. S1).


[PAGE 3] Whole-mount in situ hybridization

H. pulcherrimus gastrulae and larvae were fixed in 4%
paraformaldehyde in 100 mM MOPS (pH 7.5), 0.5 M NaCl
for overnight at 4°C. Whole-mount in situ hybridization
was performed essentially as described (Arenas-Mena et al.
2000). The stained specimens were photographed using a
digital photo system (SPOT, Diagnostic Instruments) with
a light microscope (Power BX, Olympus). The LR
directions of the stained larvae were carefully determined
under the microscope, based on the positions of oral-sided
bilateral clusters of primary mesenchyme cells in gastrulae
and prisms, and of bilateral arms and oral hood in plutei.


[PAGE 4] Immunohistochemistry

For the fixation of embryos before hatching stages, eggs
were inseminated in JSW containing 1 mM aminotriazole
to prevent hardening of the fertilization envelope, and the
formed envelopes were removed by gentle pipetting
(Showman and Foerder 1979). The collected embryos
and larvae were fixed with 2% paraformaldehyde in 0.1 M
MOPS (pH 7.5) and 0.5 M NaCl for 30 min at room
temperature. The fixed specimens were extracted with cold
methanol for 5 min and transferred into 70% ethanol. The
specimens were stored in 70% ethanol at −20°C or in PBT
containing 0.1% NaN3 at 4°C. Some specimens were
embedded in gelatin/albumin as described (Levin 2004b).
The blocks were sectioned at 20 µm and processed for
immunohistochemistry using standard methods. Sections
were blocked with PBT-BSA (PBT with 1% bovine serum
albumin) plus 10% goat serum. An antibody for Xenopus
H,K-ATPase α- or β-subunit (kindly provided by Dr.
Kaethi Geering) was used at a 1:500 dilution, followed
by PBS-BSA washes (six times, 1 h each). An APase-
conjugated anti-rabbit secondary antibody was applied at a
dilution of 1:1,500, followed by washes (six times, 1 h
each), and detected using the standard BCIP/NBT sub-
strate.


[PAGE 4] Western blotting

Blastula-stage embryos were rapidly frozen in the −80°C
freezer and resuspended in lysis buffer (TritonX-100,
50 mM NaCl, 10 mM NaF, 1 mM Na3VO4, 5 mM EDTA,
10 mM Tris-Cl pH 7.6, 2 mM PMSF). Protein solution was
mixed at 1:1 with Laemmli sample buffer (BioRad)
containing 2.5% 2-mercaptoethanol. The proteins were
fractionated by SDS-PAGE and electrotransferred to a
PVDF membrane. After washing, the membrane was
blocked with 3% BSA and 5% dry milk in Tris-buffered
saline including 0.1% Tween-20 (TTBS). It was then
incubated overnight in a Mini-PROTEAN II multiscreen
apparatus (BioRad) at 4°C with the primary antibody to
Xenopus H,K-ATPase β-subunit, diluted in TTBS plus 3%
BSA and 5% dry milk (1:3,000). After washing, the blots
were incubated with peroxidase-conjugated secondary
antibody (1:5,000) in the same buffer and developed
using an ImmunoStar Chemiluminescent Protein Detection
System (BioRad) according to the manufacturer’s instruc-
tions.


[PAGE 4] Results

HpNot and HpFoxFQ-like exhibit distinct LR
asymmetrical expression in prism-pluteus stage

We recently found that the Not-type homeobox gene
ortholog of H. pulcherrimus, HpNot (DDBJ accession no.
AB183890), is expressed in the right coelomic pouch, but
not in the left, of two-armed pluteus larvae (Fig. 1A; the
detailed expression pattern throughout embryogenesis will
be reported elsewhere). The asymmetric localization of the
transcript began at prism stage at the tip of archenteron
(Fig. 1Aa). The signal at the archenteron tip moved into the
right pouch of bilaterally forming coela, and finally in a
two-armed pluteus stage at 42 hpf; the mesodermal
expression was restricted to the right coelom, but not to
the left (Fig. 1Ab,c).

Spfoxc was reported as an expressed sequence tag in
another sea urchin Strogylocentrotus purpuratus, which
showed a LR asymmetric expression pattern (Ransick et
al. 2002). We cloned a closely related cDNA from H.
pulcherrimus, which contained a full coding sequence,
and named HpFoxFQ-like (DDBJ accession no. AB
191390). The expression pattern of this transcript in H.
pulcherrimus prism-pluteus larvae was quite similar to
that described on Spfoxc (Ransick et al. 2002). In short,
the HpFoxFQ-like transcript was found at the top of the
differentiating gut of prisms (Fig. 1Ba). At 38 hpf, the
two-armed pluteus stage, the signal at the archenteron tip,
was divided and incorporated into the coelomic sacs. At
that time, the left-sided signal was always with more
intensity than the right one (Fig. 1Bb). Two-armed plutei
at 42 hpf showed specific expression in the left coelomic
pouch, while the right one ceased to express the signal
(Fig. 1Bc). These clearly show that HpNot and Hp-
FoxFQ-like can be used as right and left-specific
asymmetric gene markers, respectively.

A pharmacological screen implicates ion flux
upstream of HpNot expression
Using these markers, we sought to examine whether, as
recently reported in vertebrates (Levin et al. 2002; Raya et
al. 2004), ion flux was required for the correct sidedness of
asymmetric gene expression. To test this and to identify
candidate electrogenic genes for subsequent analysis
(Adams and Levin 2005), we utilized a number of well-
characterized drug blockers targeting plasma membrane
ion flow or gap-junctional communication (Table 1). Those
compounds were applied continuously after fertilization,

[PAGE 7] and two-armed plutei at 40-42 hpf were fixed for analysis
by in situ hybridization against HpNot. The expression
patterns of HpNot varied considerably among treated
individuals, and we categorized the expression patterns
seen at the archenteron tip and coelomic pouches into
seven classes (Fig. 2A,B). Larvae developed in the
artificial seawater (JSW) showed a 90% incidence of
normal right side-specific expression (Fig. 2Aa,Ca).
Exposure to 1% DMSO, a common vehicle, decreased
the right-specific pattern to 70%, but the majority of the
rest showed the top-right (TR) pattern; namely, they
retained the right-sided pattern (Fig. 2Cb); p≈0.096 for
JSW vs 1% DMSO). Thus, DMSO was used at final
concentration of 0.4% or less for analyses below, a level
that does not affect the right-sided pattern of HpNot. Most
of the candidate compounds tested were found not to have
significant effects on LR-asymmetric expression of
HpNot; these included amiloride hydrochloride (DuVall
et al. 1998; Harris and Fliegel 1999), 9-anthracenecar-
boxylic acid (Landry et al. 1987), 18α-glycyrrhetinic acid
(Davidson and Baumgarten 1988), and lanthanum chlo-
ride (Nathan et al. 1988) (Fig. 2Cc,e,f); p>0.02, 0.36,
0.97, and 0.47, respectively; see Materials and methods
for the calculation). Based on these data, we conclude
that amiloride-sensitive Na+ channels, the Na+/H+-
ATPase, Cl− channels, Ca2+ channels, and gap-junctional
communication are not required for the asymmetric
expression of HpNot. Importantly, these data indicate that
LR asymmetry in sea urchins is not labile, and is not
generally sensitive to non-specific pharmacological
perturbation.

In contrast, treatment with lansoprazole, a member of a
class of blockers which specifically inhibit the H,K-ATPase
pump in organisms ranging from protozoa to mammals
(Sanders et al. 1992; Jiang et al. 2002), significantly
randomized the normal HpNot pattern (p<0.008; Fig. 2Cg,
asterisk). This observation raised the possibility that
endogenous H,K-ATPase activity may function in the
patterning of the LR axis in echinoid development. To
further test the possibility that the H,K-ATPase is a
component of the mechanisms upstream of LR asymmetric
gene expression, we examined the effects of other specific
blockers of the H,K-ATPase, omeprazole (Sachs et al.
1995) and SCH28080 (Munson et al. 2000). Both of these
compounds also destabilized significantly the normal ex-
pression pattern of HpNot (Fig. 2Ch,i; asterisks; p<10−1,
10−3, respectively). A considerable number of larvae
treated with lansoprazole, omeprazole, or SCH28080
exhibited bilateral expression (LTR, LR and T patterns,
marked with $ in Fig. 2Cg-i), and also did reversed
expression (L and LT patterns, marked with +).
General developmental delay could possibly be caused
by treatment of the compounds. The alkaline phosphatase
(APase) expression levels were examined to determine if
omeprazole treatment resulted in delay of endomesoder-
mal tissue development. In treated embryos, weak
expression of APase activity was found in the gut of
30.5 hpf prisms, and then the signal intensity increased in
following 6 h (Supplementary Fig. S1); this time course

[PAGE 8] was quite consistent with that in the control embryos, as
well as a previous report (Hamada and Kiyomoto 2003).
The paired coelomic pouches were also well-formed in
larvae exposed to omeprazole. Therefore, we conclude
that developmental delay is insignificant and cannot
explain the increase of the bilateral expression patterns.
To assess further the effect of omeprazole on the sided
HpNot expression, a large number of the omeprazole-
treated and non-treated larvae were examined at 42, 45, and
48 hpf (Fig. 2D). While most larvae in the control
population (98%) established right-side specific HpNot
by 42 hpf (Fig. 2Da-c), incidence of the normal right
specific pattern was decreased to 57% (42 hpf) ~ 69%
(48 hpf) in the population exposed to 58 µM omeprazole
(Fig. 2Dd-f). Increases of both reversed and bilateral
patterns were observed (Fig. 2Dd-f; + and $, re-
spectively), being consistent with the results from smaller
populations, described above (Fig. 2Cg-i). During 6 h from
42 hpf, incidence of bilateral patterns decreased, and those
of normal and reversed patterns slightly increased
(Fig. 2Dd-f). The disruption of sided HpNot expression
was statistically supported by chi-squared tests (p<10−8 in
every stage).
Another compound with a significant effect on laterality
was the calcium ionophore, A23187. Treatment with
A23187 disrupted the normal pattern (p<0.003), causing
a dramatic increase in the incidence of the inverted
expression pattern (L pattern) (Fig. 2A,Cj, #). These data
show that a significant incidence of LR defects in the
sidedness of HpNot expression can be caused by H,K-
ATPase blockers, and also by a calcium ionophore.

The H,K-ATPase blocker and the calcium ionophore
disrupt the normal asymmetric localization
of HpFoxFQ-like
HpNot is a right-side marker, while HpFoxFQ-like is
expressed preferentially in the left coelom (Fig. 1). We
asked whether, like HpNot, the laterality of the left-sided
gene is also affected by the exposure of the H,K-ATPase
blockers and the calcium ionophore. Omeprazole and
A23187 were continuously applied after fertilization, and
the expression patterns of HpFoxFQ-like were analyzed in
the 40-42 hpf two-armed plutei (Fig. 2E). A significant
number of normal larvae exhibited signal in both sides of
coelomic pouches during the growth of two-armed plutei
(Fig. 2Ea-c). This complicated pattern made it more
difficult to assess the effect of the compounds than when
HpNot was used as a marker. However, a considerable
decrease of left-directed expression (Fig. 2Ed, asterisk) and
increases of bilateral patterns (Fig. 2Ed, $) were observed
in omeprazole-treated larvae. A23187 treatment induced a
22% incidence of the reverse-sided expression of
HpFoxFQ-like (Fig. 2Ee, marked with #). These data
suggest that the LR asymmetric pattern of HpFoxFQ-like
expression is likewise affected by the H,K-ATPase blocker
and the calcium ionophore.


[PAGE 8] Omeprazole can disrupt the side-specificity
for the adult rudiment placement
Sea urchin larvae consistently form the adult rudiment on
the left side of the body in six- to eight-armed pluteus
stage. It was already known that A23187 has the ability to
disorder the sided placement of adult rudiment (Fujiwara
et al. 1997). To determine whether omeprazole can disrupt
the left-side specific placement of the rudiment in the aged
larvae, the omeprazole-treated two-armed plutei were
reared for 2 weeks. All of the larvae untreated or exposed
to 0.2% DMSO (the vehicle solvent) showed normal left
rudiment. On the other hand, exposure to 58 µM
omeprazole up to two-armed pluteus stage (0-40 hpf)
brought about significant numbers of eight-armed larvae
whose side-specific rudiment formation was disrupted
(Fig. 3A; p<10−4, see Materials and methods for the
calculation). The inverted placement of adult rudiment
was found in the treated population (Fig. 3A,E; about 11%
in this shown case and 4% in the least case we en-
countered). Interestingly, some treated larvae showed no
indications of the rudiment in spite of their well-shaped
eight arms (Fig. 3A,F). More often, larvae exhibiting di-
minished rudiment formation were also found, where the
vestibule, side-specific ectodermal invagination, was only
detected without any signs of mesodermal transformation
(l.v. and r.v. patterns in Fig. 3A). Such cases were seldom
seen in the control populations (Fig. 3A). Sibling two-
armed plutei, fixed previously from the same treated
batch, showed a disruption pattern of HpNot expression
(p<10−23) and exhibited the comparable incidence
(~10%) of reverse-sided expression of HpNot (Fig. 3B,
marked with #).


[PAGE 8] H,K-ATPase-like immunoreactivity is specifically
localized from cleavage to blastula stages
We performed immunohistochemistry on whole or sec-
tioned embryos using polyclonal antibodies raised against
the Xenopus laevis H,K-ATPase subunits. Western blot
analysis using antibody for the β-subunit showed a single,
strong, specific band, whose molecular weight (~52 kDa)
was comparable with those of the vertebrate cognates
(Fig. 4F). A strikingly asymmetric expression was
detected; the antibodies to the α-subunit or the β-subunit
of H,K-ATPase stained a single blastomere of 32-cell
embryos (Fig. 4A,B). The blastomere occupied a radially
asymmetrical location for embryos, which was determined
by the direction of presumed animal-vegetal axis
(Fig. 4B). Later, the positive cells were often more
numerous and remained occupying a side of embryos
through cleavage-blastula stages (Fig. 4C-E). No evident
signal was found during gastrula stages (data not shown).
These data reveal an established asymmetry in the sea
urchin embryo at a very early stage and suggest that the
target of the H,K-ATPase loss-of-function reagents used in
our screen does indeed exist in the sea urchin embryos.


[PAGE 9] Discussion
The present study showed that H,K-ATPase blockers
disrupted normal distribution of LR asymmetric gene
expression sites and the placement of adult rudiment, and
also revealed that the H,K-ATPase-like antigens are
localized asymmetrically in the early embryos of the
echinoid. These data extend prior observations suggesting
involvement of the H,K-ATPase in asymmetry (Ishii et al.
2003; Duboc et al. 2005), and strongly implicate an H,K-
ATPase-like protein as a crucial component of invertebrate
LR patterning.

Breaking the radial/bilateral symmetries in early sea
urchin embryogenesis
The H,K-ATPase is a member of P-type ATPase family,
which also includes the Na, K-ATPase and sarcoplasmic
reticulum Ca2+-ATPase. They consist of α- and β-subunits,
and the binding sites for ATP, H⁺, and K+ are all found in
the α-subunit. The β-subunit contributes to the stabiliza-
tion of the complex within the membrane (Møller et al.
1996). Omeprazole and lansoprazole are benzidazoles that
can be stabilized and activated in an acidic environment to
form a cationic sulfenamide. They are activated by the
microenvironmental acidity created by H,K-ATPase and
other ubiquitous H⁺ pumps, and the derivative reacts with
cysteine residues in the extracellular surface of the α-
subunit to inhibit its catalytic activities. The specificity and
resulting low incidence of side-effects have made these
compounds useful clinical reagents (Vakil 2003). Another
blocker, SCH28080, is an acid pump antagonist with a high
specificity to gastric H,K-ATPase, targeting a site of the α-
subunit that is partially overlapping to, but distinct from,
the target site(s) of omeprazole (Asano et al. 2004).
SCH28080 does not need acid-activation to block H,K-
ATPase activity. These compounds are also known to be
effective and specific blockers of protozoan H,K-ATPases
(Mukherjee et al. 2001; Jiang et al. 2002), demonstrating
the high applicability of these compounds as H,K-ATPase
loss-of-function reagents for a wide variety of organisms.
While H,K-ATPase genes have not been characterized in
sea urchins to date, its functional existence in development
has been suggested (Mitsunaga et al. 1987).
Three different H,K-ATPase inhibitors (comprising two
different mechanisms of blockade) disrupted the sidedness
of asymmetric markers at a statistically significant level at
physiological concentrations. Importantly, consistent with
the specificity of the H,K-ATPase inhibitors utilized in this
study, a number of channel/pump inhibitors had no effect
on asymmetry, indicating that asymmetry is not a highly
labile process in the sea urchin, and that general phar-
macological inhibition of ion flux is not sufficient to
randomize it. Moreover, the treatments did not disturb the
anterior-posterior or oral-aboral axis specification at the
doses indicated in Table 1, making secondary effects on
asymmetry (through simple toxicity) unlikely. This possi-
ble effect was also carefully excluded by histochemical test
of APase expression (Supplementary Fig. S1). The treat-
ment with H,K-ATPase blockers often induces a transpo-
sition of HpNot and HpFoxFQ-like signals around the
archenteron tip region, from side-specific manner (R and
TR pattern for HpNot, L and LT for HpFoxFQ-like) to
reversed or bilateral patterns. The increase of LTR and
reversed populations with those blockers also indicates that
this phenotype is not a mere developmental delay but a true
laterality defect. Considering that many larvae exhibited an
incompleteness of allocation of expression sites into the
pouch with associating increases of TR pattern in the
HpNot case and of LT pattern in the HpFoxFQ-like case,
the effect caused by H,K-ATPase blockers seems to reflect
a 'weakened potential