Endogenous Voltage Potentials and the Microenvironment:
Bioelectric Signals that Reveal, Induce and Normalize Cancer
Brook Chernet and Michael Levin*

Abstract
Cancer may be a disease of geometry: a misregulation of the field of information that orchestrates individual cells' activities towards normal anatomy. Recent work identified molecular mechanisms underlying a novel system of developmental control: bioelectric gradients. Endogenous spatio-temporal differences in resting potential of non-neural cells provide instructive cues for cell regulation and complex patterning during embryogenesis and regeneration. It is now appreciated that these cues are an important layer of the dysregulation of cell: cell interactions that leads to cancer. Abnormal depolarization of resting potential (Vmem) is a convenient marker for neoplasia and activates a metastatic phenotype in genetically-normal cells in vivo. Moreover, oncogene expression depolarizes cells that form tumor-like structures, but is unable to form tumors if this depolarization is artificially prevented by misexpression of hyperpolarizing ion channels. Vmem triggers metastatic behaviors at considerable distance, mediated by transcriptional and epigenetic effects of electrically-modulated flows of serotonin and butyrate. While in vivo data on voltages in carcinogenesis comes mainly from the amphibian model, unbiased genetic screens and network profiling in rodents and human tissues reveal several ion channel proteins as bona fide oncogene and promising targets for cancer drug development. However, we propose that a focus on specific channel genes is just the tip of the iceberg. Bioelectric state is determined by post-translational gating of ion channels, not only from genetically-specified complements of ion translocators. A better model is a statistical dynamics view of spatial Vmem gradients. Cancer may not originate at the single cell level, since gap junctional coupling results in multi-cellular physiological networks with multiple stable attractors in bioelectrical state space. New medical applications await a detailed understanding of the mechanisms by which organ target morphology stored in real-time patterns of ion flows is perceived or mis-perceived by cells. Mastery of somatic voltage gradients will lead to cancer normalization or rebooting strategies, such as those that occur in regenerating and embryonic organs, resulting in transformative advances in basic biology and oncology.

Keywords
Bioelectricity; Resting potential; Voltage gradient; Normalization; Reprogramming; Microenvironment


[PAGE 2] Introduction
"Cancer is no more a disease of cells than a traffic jam is a disease of cars. A lifetime of study of the internal-combustion engine would not help anyone understand our traffic problems-- D. W. Smithers"

Ideas in cancer biology comprise two complementary paradigms. The mainstream view is that cancer cells are irreversibly damaged: they have accumulated genetic or epigenetic damage and are fundamentally a different kind of cell. On this view (the somatic mutation model), cancer cells have acquired cell-autonomous properties that underlie unlimited proliferation and metastasis [1,2]. Contrasting with this view is the idea that cells exhibit neoplastic behavior and form tumors due to a change of interactions with their environment. This view of cancer is focused on context-non-cell-autonomous signaling that activates cellular misbehavior in the host [3-8]. The latter class of models ranges from simple growth suppressive molecules (morphostats) secreted by healthy tissue [9,10] and averaging effects of cell neighbors that stabilize stochastic gene expression [11] to suppression of tumorigenesis by tissue-level organization [12,13] to global models of whole-body morphogenetic information fields [14-19].

While the mutation-centered paradigm has dominated work in this field for decades, increased attention is now focused on cancer as a progressive loss of the organization capacity of the environment over the heterogeneous behavior of isolated cells [18-24]. Interestingly, “no cancer exhibits any trait which cannot be found in some normal tissue as the expression of normal genomic activity; no cancer grows faster than an embryo nor is any cancer cell more invasive than a macrophage nor are cancer cell lines more immortal than are germ lines. The only distinction is that, in the cancer, the expression or lack of expression of many traits may be inappropriate for the tissue in which the cancer occurs" [25]. This is a view of cancer as fundamentally a developmental disorder of cell regulation.

Large-scale shape, or the correct geometric arrangement of organs and tissues in an organism, is a key concept in biological growth and development. To achieve optimal health, organisms strive to maintain shape at all levels, from the single cell to the whole organism. Cancer can be seen as an error of geometry, because tumor cells grow, migrate, and function without regard for the orderly structure within which they occur [26]. This is seen most acutely in teratomas - embryonic tumors that display extensive differentiation of a number of tissues combined with a complete absence of orderly organization of the whole.

The idea that cancer is a developmental disease is an old one [9,10,26–29]. Needham and Waddington speculated that cancers represented an escape from the control of the morphogenetic field [30–32]. On this view, tumors form when cells stop obeying the normal patterning cues of the body: "cancer as part of an inexorable process in which the organism falls behind in its ceaseless effort to maintain order" [28].

Understanding cancer as a reversible physiological state of a multi-cellular dynamical system (as opposed to damage within single cancer stem cells) has significant medical implications because it suggests specific prevention and detection strategies focused on modulating the physiological interrelationships among many cells instead of looking for DNA markers in single cancer stem cells. A mechanistic dissection of these pathways may give rise to strategies that reboot [23] or normalize cancer, in contrast to current approaches that all seek to kill tumors and thus risk a compensatory proliferation response by rogue cells that still remain [33]. Thus, biologists are beginning to explore the idea that cancer is not a genetic disease of specific loci but rather a kind of attractor in a multi-dimensional transcriptional space describing cell states [17]: “The topology of the attractor is the 'invisible hand' driving the system functions into coherent behavioral states: they are self-organizing structures and can capture the gene expression profiles associated with cell fates" [34]. Huang et al. also point out an interesting paradox: while many studies seek to "determine which gene is mutated to explain an incremental malignant trait, no one doubts that normal cells as distinct as a mature neuron vs. a blood or epithelial stem cell share the exact same genome! No mutations are invoked to explain the remarkable phenotypes during cell lineages in development" [34], and indeed aneuploidy is routinely present in normal brain, testes, and liver, but does not usually result in cancer (reviewed in 8).

[PAGE 3] A complete picture of cancer no doubt involves both an understanding of DNA damage and cell signaling dynamics, although considerable controversy exists as to the most appropriate level of organization at which to search for the origin and cure of cancer (ranging from genes, to stem cells, to tissues, to entire body plan organizing fields). Here we focus on bioelectrical information-exchanging processes occurring within and among cell groups in the suppression and progression of cancer, followed by an in-depth discussion of the importance of context and cell: cell signaling to the cancer problem in general. Our hypothesis is that while ion channels are increasingly revealed as important oncogenes, a focus on specific channel genes is just the tip of the iceberg because bioelectric cell states result from post-translational gating of ion channels and pumps, not only from genetically-specified complements of ion translocators. A more fruitful model of cancer and its reprogramming may be a statistical dynamics view of spatial gradients of resting potential as a systems-level property of multi-cellular physiological networks of cells linked by gap junctions.

[PAGE 3] Bioelectricity as an instructive component of microenvironment

[PAGE 3] Voltage gradients in non-neural cells control cell behavior—It has long been known that bioelectrical signals, or spatio-temporally patterned ion flows in non-excitable cells, are important determinants of cell behavior [35,36]. Steady-state endogenous ion currents, resting potentials (voltage gradients), and electric fields are produced by the activity of ion channel and pump proteins across cell membranes and their slow dynamics are distinct from the rapid action potentials of nerve and muscle (Figure 1). While related biophysical phenomena include transepithelial electric fields [37,38], ultraweak photon emission [39,40], and coherent AC electromagnetic fields [41,42], here we focus on distributions of Vmem or membrane potential [43]. The many interesting studies of applied field effects are discussed in several excellent recent reviews [44-47].

Bioelectric properties of cells and the electrical states of cells in the microenvironment are known to control several key behaviors of relevance to cancer [38,48–54]. For example, electric fields generated by ion pumping across epithelia serve as migration cues for cellular galvanotaxis [55–59] - an important guidance modality for cell movement within the host. Cell shape changes, such as increased arborization, are also driven by endogenous electric fields and changes in Vmem [60–64]. Together, migration and shape properties are key elements of successful metastasis.

[PAGE 4] Moreover, resting potential established by ion channel and pump proteins is important for determination of differentiation state and proliferation; generally, a depolarized state is indicative of plastic, undifferentiated cells (e.g., stem cells), while differentiation is caused by increase of negative Vmem. Functional control of cell state by changes in Vmem has been observed in many kinds of stem and progenitor cells [65–75], including adult human mesenchymal stem cell [71,76] which can be kept stem-like despite the presence of chemical differentiation factors by forced depolarization, and in induced pluripotentent stem cells [77]. Even mature CNS neurons can be made to re-enter mitosis by sustained depolarization [78,79] revealing the power of transmembrane potential to regulate proliferative potential in adult somatic cells.

Importantly, the molecular mechanisms by which cell-autonomous [80] and non-autonomous [49,81] bioelectric events control downstream processes are now beginning to be fleshed out. Electric fields are transduced to cell migration machinery via Ca2+-dependent mechanisms. A cell with a negative membrane potential, when exposed to an electric field, becomes more hyperpolarized near the anode, allowing the passive inflow of Ca2+ through voltage-gated calcium channels. An increase in Ca2+ in the anodal side of the membrane results in increased polymerization/depolymerization of actin, contraction of actomyosin, and decreased adhesion; collectively, the anodal side contracts and is propelled towards the cathode [82]. Inositol-phospholipid signaling, PI(3)Κγ, and cdc42/rho have been especially implicated in setting the directionality of cytoskeleton-mediated migration polarity in several cell types [83,84].

Changes in Vmem of cells, such as cancer-associated depolarization, can trigger transcriptional changes by 1) regulating the movement of morphogens such as serotonin, calcium, and inositol triphosphate through gap junctions [85–91], 2) controlling the import/export of small signaling molecules such as serotonin and butyrate across membrane exchangers [60,91–94], and 3) modulating the activity level of phosphatases such as PTEN [95-98]. Together, these transduction mechanisms convert an essentially biophysical state change into secondary messenger events that impact on transcriptional and epigenetic regulation of loci such as NODAL which are important for the cancer phenotype [94,99]. While bioelectric cues feed into the same molecular-genetic pathways that are known to regulate normal and neoplastic cell behaviors, they form a pathway that functions alongside biochemical gradients, but with significantly different spatial dynamics, to coordinate normal tissue morphology.

[PAGE 4] Spatio-temporal gradients of Vmem are instructive patterning cues-Disruption of the electrical gradients, or the mechanisms by which they are perceived by cells, are one way that complex anatomical order is subverted during carcinogenesis. Recent development of state-of-the-art tools for the detection and experimental manipulation of biophysical signals in multicellular patterning contexts [80,100–102] has revealed how distributions of voltage gradients mediate positional information, organ identity of large cell groups, and initiation signals for complex developmental modules such as tail or limb regeneration. Using a combination of fluorescent voltage-reporter dyes to characterize spatial Vmem distributions and functional studies using targeted misexpression of a panel of well-characterized ion transporters to specifically modify those gradients in vivo, instructive signaling roles of transmembrane voltage gradients have been identified in embryogenesis and regeneration, adding to the list of such roles identified in earlier work using functional physiology [103,104].

[PAGE 5] During early frog development, the redistribution of maternal potassium channels and proton pumps in early blastomeres results in a Vmem difference across gap junction-coupled cells [89,90,105–108]. The resulting voltage gradient redistributes pre-nervous serotonin to the right side, which then interacts with a cytoplasmic receptor that binds histone deacetylase [1] and shuts off Nodal expression on the right side of the embryo [99,106,109]. Later, during craniofacial patterning, the position of the eyes [110] and other elements of the face [111] is determined by a regionalization of naïve ectoderm into distinct domains of hyperpolarized cells. These voltage gradients regulate the expression of genes like Frizzled, and artificially altering this pattern by misexpression of specific ion channels and pumps is sufficient to perturb normal craniofacial anatomy and to reprogram tissues far away from the head to form properly-patterned eyes [110]. Importantly, in such cases, as in the cancer phenotypes discussed below, it is really the Vmem that is the necessary and sufficient factor for inducing specific shape change – it does not matter which ion translocator protein is involved, or what ion species is used: a given voltage change, no matter how it is produced, activates specific downstream events.

During regeneration of flatworms, the patterning activity of adult stem cells (neoblasts) is regulated by gap junctional connectivity and a set of proton and potassium flows [112–114]. By regulation of apoptotic remodeling and downstream activity of genes such as Wnt11 [115], the physiological gradient determines the anatomy of the organs built after injury. In vertebrates, where electric fields were long ago implicated in limb regeneration [116–123], recent experiments showed that driving proton and sodium fluxes can initiate complete tail [124,125] or limb [126] regeneration in a range of non-regenerative conditions. The mechanisms involve guidance of innervation into the stump, activation of blastema genes such as MSX1, Notch, Delta, BMP2, and BMP4, and induction of cell proliferation in the wound mesenchyme.

Indeed, a number of recent molecular studies using unbiased approaches have identified a range of ion channels, gap junctions, and ion pumps in: morphogenesis of the trachea [127], development of skin pigmentation pattern [128,129], regeneration of the zebrafish fin [130], development of mammalian face [131-139], growth of the cerebellum [140–143], and formation of the skeletal [144], cardiac [145,146], and urogenital [147,148] systems. Thus in addition to experiments directly studying bioelectricity in amphibian, avian, and planarian systems, data from genetic models such as Drosophila also identifies channels such as Kir2.1 as important regulators of Dpp signaling and wing patterning [137].

Chernet and Levin
Page 5
signals in multicellular patterning contexts [80,100–102] has revealed how distributions of
voltage gradients mediate positional information, organ identity of large cell groups, and
initiation signals for complex developmental modules such as tail or limb regeneration.
Using a combination of fluorescent voltage-reporter dyes to characterize spatial Vmem
distributions and functional studies using targeted misexpression of a panel of well-
characterized ion transporters to specifically modify those gradients in vivo, instructive
signaling roles of transmembrane voltage gradients have been identified in embryogenesis
and regeneration, adding to the list of such roles identified in earlier work using functional
physiology [103,104].

During early frog development, the redistribution of maternal potassium channels and
proton pumps in early blastomeres results in a Vmem difference across gap junction-coupled
cells [89,90,105–108]. The resulting voltage gradient redistributes pre-nervous serotonin to
the right side, which then interacts with a cytoplasmic receptor that binds histone
deacetylase [1] and shuts off Nodal expression on the right side of the embryo [99,106,109].
Later, during craniofacial patterning, the position of the eyes [110] and other elements of the
face [111] is determined by a regionalization of naïve ectoderm into distinct domains of
hyperpolarized cells. These voltage gradients regulate the expression of genes like Frizzled,
and artificially altering this pattern by misexpression of specific ion channels and pumps is
sufficient to perturb normal craniofacial anatomy and to reprogram tissues far away from the
head to form properly-patterned eyes [110]. Importantly, in such cases, as in the cancer
phenotypes discussed below, it is really the Vmem that is the necessary and sufficient factor
for inducing specific shape change – it does not matter which ion translocator protein is
involved, or what ion species is used: a given voltage change, no matter how it is produced,
activates specific downstream events.

During regeneration of flatworms, the patterning activity of adult stem cells (neoblasts) is
regulated by gap junctional connectivity and a set of proton and potassium flows [112–114].
By regulation of apoptotic remodeling and downstream activity of genes such as Wnt11
[115], the physiological gradient determines the anatomy of the organs built after injury. In
vertebrates, where electric fields were long ago implicated in limb regeneration [116–123],
recent experiments showed that driving proton and sodium fluxes can initiate complete tail
[124,125] or limb [126] regeneration in a range of non-regenerative conditions. The
mechanisms involve guidance of innervation into the stump, activation of blastema genes
such as MSX1, Notch, Delta, BMP2, and BMP4, and induction of cell proliferation in the
wound mesenchyme.

Indeed, a number of recent molecular studies using unbiased approaches have identified a
range of ion channels, gap junctions, and ion pumps in: morphogenesis of the trachea [127],
development of skin pigmentation pattern [128,129], regeneration of the zebrafish fin [130],
development of mammalian face [131-139], growth of the cerebellum [140–143], and
formation of the skeletal [144], cardiac [145,146], and urogenital [147,148] systems. Thus in
addition to experiments directly studying bioelectricity in amphibian, avian, and planarian
systems, data from genetic models such as Drosophila also identifies channels such as
Kir2.1 as important regulators of Dpp signaling and wing patterning [137].


Page 6
With respect to wound healing, inhibition of which is known to be a tumor promoting agent
[149-151], elegant molecular genetics experiments have now revealed some of the elements
underlying endogenous electric field-mediated cell migrations. Epithelial wound closure
involves Integrin Beta-4 (ITGB4), Cyclic AMP, betaphosphatidylinositol-3-OH kinase-y
(PI(3)Ky) and phosphatase and tensin homolog (PTEN) [49,81,83,84,152]. Having seen that
endogenous electric fields and Vmem gradients play an instructive role in normal patterning,
what is the evidence that dysregulation of bioelectrical communication can underlie the
cancer phenotype?

Bioelectric gradients in cancer at the cell level

Ion channels are oncogenes and important drug targets—The view that cancer is
a developmental disorder predicts that molecular mechanisms known to be important
mediators of the morphogenetic field would be involved in tumorigenesis. Indeed, there is
mounting evidence (Figure 2) that the bioelectric cues that establish normal pattern can go
awry and result in cancerous growth [51,153,154]. The function of ion channels is involved
in the self-sufficiency in growth signals, insensitivity to anti-growth signals, evasion of
programmed cell death, limitless replicative potential, sustained angiogenesis, and tissue
invasion and metastasis [52]. Ion channels, pumps, and gap junctions are now recognized as
oncogenes [51], predictive markers [52], and an important set of targets for new cancer
drugs that's seek to modulate cell behavior by tweaking electrical controls of proliferation or
metastatic behavior [155]. Importantly however, oncochannel misregulation occurs not only
through mutations in channel genes but also by changes in the rich network of events that
implement post-translational gating of wild-type ion channels.

Tumor cells differ from untransformed cells in terms of the type of ion channels and pumps
they express and in the resulting membrane potential of the cells [156–165]. Some channel
levels are thus used as markers, such as the K2P channel TREK-1 and the sodium channel
NaV in prostate cancer [166,167], and the TRPM1 channel in melanoma [168,169]. Tumor
cells' membrane voltage is often determined by a different transporter than that of normal
cells and it has been suggested that this gives the cells a selective advantage [160]. For
example, hepatocellular carcinoma up-regulates the V-ATPase, which is then localized to
the plasma membrane [170].

The function of ion translocators, (Table 1) such as voltage-gated K+ channels [171,172] and
Cl channels [173], controls the proliferation rate of a number of cells that often form
tumors [174–185] or leukemia [186]. ERG is particularly involved in cell growth signals
[160,187-191], and is implicated in transformation of prostate epithelium [192]. Also
implicated are 2-pore channels such as KCNK9 [193,194], and voltage-gated sodium
channels, being definitive oncogenes – necessary and sufficient for a transformed phenotype
[195]. Transfection of the EAG K+ channel confers a transformed phenotype in mammalian
cells [196], and hEAG1 channel expression is regulated by p53 (via miR-34 and E2F1)
[197]. In human breast cancer cells, K+ current controls progression through the cell cycle
[198]; activation of an ATP-sensitive potassium channel is required for breast cancer cells to
undergo the G1/G0-S transition [199]. Metastatic potential correlates with voltage-gated
inward sodium current and it has been suggested that some sodium channels may be


Page 7
oncofetal genes, encoding signals that are active during the rapid and autonomous growth of
tumors and embryos [167,200-203].

Migration of cells including B-16 melanoma is dependent on K+ channels [204]. The
voltage-gated sodium channels (VGSCs) potentiate breast cancer metastasis [203], and
indeed the involvement of NaV in the galvanotaxis that allows prostate and breast cancer
cells to move across vessel lumens [82,195,205–211] is one of the leading stories on ion
channels in cancer. Highly up-regulated activities of NaV confers on cancer cells directional
motility and invasive characteristics via Ca2+ and pH-sensitive cytoskeletal remodeling
processes which facilitate metastasis [195,203]. Certain channelopathies result in syndromes
associated with cancer such as the lung cancer seen in Lambert-Eaton syndrome [212], and
the tumors present in Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome, which is caused by abnormal
imprinting of a voltage-gated potassium channel [213–215]. As will be discussed below,
Vmem induces cancer-like cell states; while a complete picture of the process remains to be
worked out in mammalian cells, a few entry-points have been identified. For example,
KID-1, a kinase induced by depolarization [216,217], is a member of the Pim family of
proto-oncogenes [218].

Voltage control functions together with the more commonly-studied signals such as growth
factors and adhesion molecules. For example, adhesion to specific substrate molecules
(mediated by integrin) causes a 20 mV hyperpolarization of resting potential in murine
neuroblastoma cells; the hyperpolarization is due to Kir channels and works through a G
protein; this hyperpolarization is gone after 1 hour and is necessary for neurite outgrowth
[219,220]. Proton pump blockers such as concanamycin and bafilomycin are known anti-
tumor agents [221–228] and repression of pancreatic tumor cells occurs after selective
blockade of IK-type channels [229]. The involvement of neurotransmitters in cancer
[230,231] could also be explained by a voltage-dependent mechanism. For example, GABA
is a tumor suppressor [232-234] and GABAA and nAChR are ligand-gated ion channels
often expressed in tumors [51].

The involvement of ion channels in transformation, growth control, and metastasis has led to
efforts to develop potassium, chloride, and sodium channel and pump modulators as clinical
agents for ovarian [235], breast [236], and prostate [237] cancer [155,238]. Unbiased drug
screens for inhibitors of cancer stem cells have identified salinomycin (a potassium
ionophore) [239] and tetraethylammonium (TEA, a potassium channel blocker) as
anticancer drugs that target tumor initiating cells. For example, TEA was found to suppress
colony formation in endometrial cancer cells while its withdrawal resulted in a significant
enhancement of tumorigenesis [240].

Which ion channels should be targeted by therapeutic drugs? In an important sense, focusing
on the channel gene or protein may be missing the bigger picture. In the current literature,
ion translocators are usually treated as single genes or proteins responsible for a specific cell
behavior (metastasis, hyperproliferation, etc.) – a cell-level view that neglects the fact that
numerous channels and pumps contribute to the Vmem gradients that mediate large-scale
patterning cues [54,242]. The true impact of bioelectricity in cancer will only occur when
we understand and target the storage of patterning information in physiological networks


Page 8
that is misprocessed in cancer [243,244]; such networks are dynamical systems with
complex feedback between the post-translational gating of many different channel and pump
proteins.

[PAGE 8] Resting potential: a statistical dynamics view

"For those who believe in the simplification and rationalization of the cancer process, the
actual course of research on the molecular basis of cancer has been largely disappointing.
Rather than revealing a small number of genetic and biochemical determinants operating
within cancer cells, molecular analyses of human cancers have revealed a bewilderingly
complex array of such factors." [245]. It is now appreciated that the essence of cancer may
not be in specific driver genes but in the dynamics of cells traversing state spaces and
shifting between different attractors [34,246]. While these state spaces are commonly
thought of in terms of transcription (gene-regulatory networks), the data on bioelectricity in
cancer suggests that another important concept may be the physiological state space.

It has long been realized that cancer differs from normal cells by the relatively depolarized
state of its cells [247–250]. As far back as the 1930's, Burr was able to detect tumors based
on voltmeter readings [251,252]. What these classical data (and the molecular data
summarized below) had in common is a focus on bioelectrical state of the cell rather than its
genetics: a given resting potential level is contributed to by all of the ion channels and
pumps in the cell. Thus, while Vmem relies on gene products, it is a complex function of all
of them and cannot even in principle be reduced to genetics or transcriptional profiles
because all of these translocator proteins are gated at the post-translational level. The
dependence of voltage upon the activities of a myriad channels which are regulated by each
other and additional physiological events (e.g., phosphorylation), and the ability of voltage
change to induce specific outcomes (regardless of which ion channels are used to alter the
Vmem of this cell), suggest a powerful paradigm borrowed from physics: statistical
mechanics.

We propose that the right concept to describe the role of Vmem in cellular control is akin to
"pressure" in physics. Pressure is a systems property – it is created by the contribution of
individual molecules' motions, but tracking any individual molecule in an attempt to
understand or manipulate what the system will do would be missing the point entirely. There
is no "driver particle” in a gas under pressure any more than there is anything special about a
particle that happens to be at the "center of gravity" of a complex object. Pressure is a
concept that exists at a higher level of organization than individual molecules, but is causal
in the sense that appropriate measurement and control of pressure as such is sufficient to
efficiently predict and rationally alter the behavior of systems. We propose that a statistical
mechanics view of Vmem is the right level to understand its involvement in cancer. Focusing
on the details of specific channel genes obscures the “necessary and sufficient causal state"
for inducing or suppressing cancer (e.g., depolarized Vmem, see below). Specific channels
may dominate the Vmem in specific cell types, and in those cell types serve as convenient
and simple genes to be targeted. However, the general situation is that one can often use any
well-characterized channel or pump to make the necessary (and functionally sufficient)
changes in Vmem. True, databases like Gene Expression Omnibus and Oncomine are


Page 9
revealing many associations between ion channels and cancer, and specific network analyses
do implicate ion channels [253] in processes such as invasiveness. We argue that this is only
the tip of the iceberg – an immense under-estimate of the true importance of voltage in
oncology, because most of the physiological changes are occurring at the post-translational
gating level, and thus are utterly invisible to the mRNA or protein profiling that is so
extensively used today.

This was seen for example in the regeneration and left-right asymmetry field, where any
number of appropriate gain-of-function channel and pump constructs could be used to
induce specific anatomical outcomes such as randomization of the asymmetric organs'
laterality or the regrowth of a tail [80,100,126]. Focusing on individual channels as “genes
for regeneration” is missing the point that the necessary and sufficient factor is often a
voltage state, such as the narrow range of Vmem that induces eye formation in any region of
the Xenopus larva [110]. With increasingly detailed profiling data, the picture is going to
only become more complicated unless we define the distinct physiological states that are
responsible for inducing specific cell behaviors such as transformation or metastasis and
formulate models at that level of biological organization. This in turn will enable us to
rationally design reagents (e.g., select specific gain-of-function channels or pharmacological
cocktails) to control Vmem appropriately in vivo.

But, if distinct Vmem levels are transduced by various second-messenger mechanisms into
transcriptional and epigenetic responses, why not simply focus on those downstream
endpoints directly? This is the situation with every complex regulatory network – any node
event (transcriptional or biophysical) has an upstream cause and a downstream effect. The
trick is to find "key nodes” – components of the functional network that are convenient to
manipulate because they offer optimal control over complex downstream events. This is
seen for example in the regeneration field, where a single hour's treatment of a non-
regenerative tail blastema is sufficient to induce the entire 8-day regeneration program of
this complex appendage (containing spinal cord) [125]. Bioelectric states appear to be
powerful master regulators that trigger complex downstream cascades (self-limiting and
self-organizing patterning modules) without the need to micromanage the process.
Importantly, recent data reveal that Vmem is a similarly potent control node in the genetic
and biophysical networks that underlie cancer.

[PAGE 9] Bioelectrical regulation of cancer in vivo

Vmem signature detects cancer-A variety of bioelectric properties have been used as
detection modalities for tumors; these capitalize on cancer cells' distinct electrical
impedance [254–268] or ion content [269,270]. Zeta potential is also associated with cancer;
for example asbestos fibers and sheets of positively-charged materials (but not powders of
the same material) induce tumors, probably by acting as a capacitor for bioelectric potential,
the positive side corresponding to the electron sink existing at a wound [271]. In this section,
we focus on depolarized Vmem, which has been suggested to correspond to the cancer state
[247-250].

One way to probe the physiology of the effects of canonical mammalian oncogenes (Glil,
Xrel3 and KRASG12D) and a mutant tumor suppressors (p53Trp248) in vivo is to

Chernet and Levin
Page 9
revealing many associations between ion channels and cancer, and specific network analyses
do implicate ion channels [253] in processes such as invasiveness. We argue that this is only
the tip of the iceberg – an immense under-estimate of the true importance of voltage in
oncology, because most of the physiological changes are occurring at the post-translational
gating level, and thus are utterly invisible to the mRNA or protein profiling that is so
extensively used today.

This was seen for example in the regeneration and left-right asymmetry field, where any
number of appropriate gain-of-function channel and pump constructs could be used to
induce specific anatomical outcomes such as randomization of the asymmetric organs'
laterality or the regrowth of a tail [80,100,126]. Focusing on individual channels as “genes
for regeneration” is missing the point that the necessary and sufficient factor is often a
voltage state, such as the narrow range of Vmem that induces eye formation in any region of
the Xenopus larva [110]. With increasingly detailed profiling data, the picture is going to
only become more complicated unless we define the distinct physiological states that are
responsible for inducing specific cell behaviors such as transformation or metastasis and
formulate models at that level of biological organization. This in turn will enable us to
rationally design reagents (e.g., select specific gain-of-function channels or pharmacological
cocktails) to control Vmem appropriately in vivo.

But, if distinct Vmem levels are transduced by various second-messenger mechanisms into
transcriptional and epigenetic responses, why not simply focus on those downstream
endpoints directly? This is the situation with every complex regulatory network – any node
event (transcriptional or biophysical) has an upstream cause and a downstream effect. The
trick is to find "key nodes” – components of the functional network that are convenient to
manipulate because they offer optimal control over complex downstream events. This is
seen for example in the regeneration field, where a single hour's treatment of a non-
regenerative tail blastema is sufficient to induce the entire 8-day regeneration program of
this complex appendage (containing spinal cord) [125]. Bioelectric states appear to be
powerful master regulators that trigger complex downstream cascades (self-limiting and
self-organizing patterning modules) without the need to micromanage the process.
Importantly, recent data reveal that Vmem is a similarly potent control node in the genetic
and biophysical networks that underlie cancer.

[PAGE 10] Bioelectrical regulation of cancer in vivo

Vmem signature detects cancer-A variety of bioelectric properties have been used as
detection modalities for tumors; these capitalize on cancer cells' distinct electrical
impedance [254–268] or ion content [269,270]. Zeta potential is also associated with cancer;
for example asbestos fibers and sheets of positively-charged materials (but not powders of
the same material) induce tumors, probably by acting as a capacitor for bioelectric potential,
the positive side corresponding to the electron sink existing at a wound [271]. In this section,
we focus on depolarized Vmem, which has been suggested to correspond to the cancer state
[247-250].

One way to probe the physiology of the effects of canonical mammalian oncogenes (Glil,
Xrel3 and KRASG12D) and a mutant tumor suppressors (p53Trp248) in vivo is to
misexpress them in Xenopus and zebrafish embryos [272–275], which induces tumor like
structures (ITLS, Figure 3A,A'). ITLS's thus form as a result of genetic interference with
signaling pathways altered in several cancer types including basal cell carcinoma, lung
cancer, leukemia, melanoma, and rhabdomysarcoma [276–279]. Examination of injected
animals using fluorescence reporters of Vmem [280] revealed unique depolarization of
tumors (and increased sodium content) compared to healthy surrounding tissues (Figure 3B)
[93,281]. Moreover, depolarization foci are present in oncogene-expressing, preneoplastic
cells that are yet to undergo transformation or show any morphological phenotype. Such
depolarized foci, while present in only 19–30% of oncogene-injected embryos (depending
on oncogene used), predict tumor formation with 50–56% success rate (15-21% false
negatives). For comparison, prostate specific antigen (PSA) level in the serum, when used as
a biomarker for prostate cancer, has ~29% predictive value [282,283]. An added advantage
of Vmem as a biomarker is that it is associated with tumors of diverse molecular origin,
suggesting a general role for Vmem change as an early indicator of tumorigenesis.

The next major areas of opportunity for bioelectric detection of cancer are four-fold. First, a
more specific physiological signature needs to be developed (to distinguish tumor cells from
adult stem cells – another depolarized population) and appropriate voltage-sensitive dye
technology implemented as a diagnostic tool to visualize areas of pre-cancer on patients as
well as observe tumor margins during surgery. In addition to visualization, a better
characterization of bioelectric state could be used to guide drug delivery vehicles such as
nanoparticles [284,285]. Second, this strategy needs to be validated in a mammalian model
system, and in a range of well-characterized human tumor cell lines. Third, it is critical to
begin to tackle the long-range aspects of biological disturbance introduced by cancer. While
body-wide morphogenetic fields and the role that Vmem distributions play in these are only
beginning to be understood [14,15], it is imperative to establish molecular models in which
to investigate the fact that transplanted or chemically-induced tumors can be detected by
aberrant voltmeter readings taken at locations far away from the tumor [251,252,286–290].
Lastly, modern work on bioelectricity in non-excitable cells has not yet addressed the
information encoded in time-dependent changes in Vmem. For example, fibroblasts
expressing Ras-oncogene respond to the drug bradykinin with Vmem oscillations, while
control cells exhibit a single transient hyperpolarization. In human carcinoma cells,
fluctuations of membrane potential are triggered by EGF and persist for long periods of time
after EGF application [291]. The mechanisms and significance of the temporal Vmem
changes for cancer initiation and progression remain to be discovered.

[PAGE 11] Depolarization of specific cells induces metastatic phenotype at a distance

Given that a depolarized Vmem is an indicator of tumorigenic potential, is it merely a side-
effect of cancer, or is it functionally instructive? This question was addressed for the first
time in vivo in a frog model [60], by the selective depolarization of a sparse set of cells
expressing the glycine-gated chloride channel (Figure 4). Using a pharmacological strategy
designed to depolarize this subpopulation, a remarkable phenotype was observed:
hyperpigmentation of the animals due to over-proliferation, increased migration, and drastic
arborization of melanocytes (pigment cells). By transiently depolarizing cells in the body, a
different cell type underwent a metastatic-like conversion, turning on expression of genes
such as Sox10 and SLUG 61. The melanocytes acquired a dendritic morphology,
upregulated mitotic activity, and invaded blood vessels and soft tissues like the neural tube
lumen and brain (Figure 5). In addition to melanocytes, disorganization and ectopic growth
of blood vessels was also observed [281], but otherwise the tadpoles were remarkably
normal in terms of overall growth and development. Importantly, the same exact effect was
induced by any method of depolarization, including by the movement of chloride, sodium,
potassium, or hydrogen ions – truly an effect initiated by Vmem depolarization, not any
specific gene product or chemical ion species. This metastatic-like conversion occurred by a
bioelectrical signal alone, without any oncogene, DNA damage, or cancer-causing chemical
being applied. Also of note here is that, like in some blood cancers, there was no primary
tumor site but a direct metastatic behavior of a normal embryonic stem cell (neural crest)
derivative. Thus, while this is an example of non-genotoxic cell-cell communication effect,
it differs from the epithelium:stroma interaction at a primary tumor site described by others
[292].

Most interesting was the non-cell-autonomous nature of the effect: the cells that acquired a
melanoma-like phenotype were not the cells whose resting potential was changed (the GlyR-
bearing cells were thus called “instructor cells”) [60,61]. Indeed, only a small number of
instructor cells had to be depolarized in order to induce the hyperpigmentation phenotype
(which is all-or-none within any individual animal). How was the communication between
these two cell types mediated? A suppression screen testing the several known methods of
transducing voltage change into transcriptional cascades revealed (Figure 6) that the
serotonin transporter SERT, which powers uptake or efflux of serotonin depending on
resting potential, was involved (much like in the bioelectric regulation of left-right
patterning); blockade of SERT could rescue the hyper pigmentation effect, and direct
application of serotonin could trigger a similar phenotype.


A number of key questions remain. First, although it is clear that serotonin signaling is
involved in the imposition of a metastatic phenotype by depolarization, serotonin is too
small to be fluorescently tagged without drastically altering its transport properties. Thus,
the movement of serotonin across long distances has not been imaged directly in this model
system. Second, it remains to be understood how hyperpigmentation occurs in an all-or-none
manner: treatments that inhibit specific serotonin receptors for example partially rescue the
effect, but they do not inhibit metastatic phenotype in some melanocytes, but instead
completely rescue only some animals in a test cohort. The current model of this effect [281]
relies on a model of amplification and antagonistic function among three different subtypes
of serotonin receptors, leading to stochastic effects in the downstream activation of CAMP
signaling. However this model remains to be tested in detail. Finally, how does this pathway
relate to mammalian cells? It is known that ivermectin, a specific opener of the glycine-
gated chloride channel, can regulate the growth of neuroblastoma [293] and leukemia cells
[294], although neither of these studies looked at the Vmem changes that would have been
induced by ivermectin in mammalian tissue culture medium. The findings in the Xenopus
model make a number of predictions for human medicine that could be tested. First, the
GlyR channel opener Ivermectin, which was used to induce the melanoma-like conversion,
could have increased the rate of melanoma and other cancer in human patients. While this
drug is no longer widely prescribed as an antiparasitic agent, this class of molecules was

[PAGE 12] used in human medicine [295] and is known to cause cancer in the parasites that it (usually)
kills by muscle depolarization and paralysis [296]. Conversely, we predict that patients
taking Prozac (the SERT blocker fluoxetine) may have lower incidence of melanoma. These
predictions await epidemiological testing.

[PAGE 12] Hyperpolarization inhibits oncogene-induced tumorigenesis

he above data show that depolarization of Vmem can, itself, activate a metastatic-like
phenotype. What role could Vmem play in carcinogenesis induced by genetic perturbation?
Well-characterized channels such as inward rectifying potassium channel (Kir 4.1) and
constitutively open glycine-gated chloride channel mutant (GlyRF99A) can be used to
generate strong hyperpolarizing currents [297,298]. When GlyRF99A is co-injected with the
Xrel3 oncogene in Xenopus larvae [93], it significantly suppresses the incidence of ITLS
formation compared to oncogene alone (Figure 7). Florescent tags on the oncogene protein
revealed that hyperpolarization could prevent the formation of tumor-like structures despite
very robust expression of oncogene in cells. The use of several different hyperpolarizing
channels based on Cl¯ and K+ confirmed that suppression of neoplastic transformation was
due to Vmem hyperpolarization per se, as opposed to ion-specific or scaffolding functions of
the ion channel proteins. Consistent with this, data in rats showed that the ion channel
modulator drug ivermectin can likewise modulate the effectiveness of carcinogenic
compounds [299].

How do changes in Vmem transduce into suppression of oncogene-mediated tumorigenesis?
A pharmacological suppression screen of several candidate mechanisms, followed by
molecular-genetic loss-of-function validation [93], implicated the sodium-coupled
monocarboxylate transporter (SLC5A8). SLC5A8 has previously been identified as a tumor-
suppressor whose transport of butyrate or other short chain fatty acids (HDAC inhibitors) is
essential in maintaining a healthy colon and/or control colon cancer invasion [300–306]. A
model of the bioelectrical regulation of oncogene activity is shown in Figure 8: oncogene
expression causes the observed depolarization, which limits the intake of Na+ through
SLC5A8, also limiting butyrate intake (co-transport, Figure 8A). Lack of HDAC regulation
due to reduced butyrate presence leads to hyperpolarization and tumor progression (Figure
8B). However, forced hyperpolarization within oncogene-expressing cells facilitates the
uptake of the positive Na⁺. This powers the import of butyrate through SLC5A8, resulting in
continuous suppression of HDAC and thus reduced proliferation and ITLS suppression
(Figure 8C). The specific genetic targets of hyperpolarization in this context remain to be
thoroughly explored, however p21 is a likely mediator. Hyperacetylation of histones as a
result of butyrate-induced HDAC inhibition – has been shown to up-regulate p21 at both at
the mRNA and protein level [307,308]. p21 inhibits cyclins/cdk's activities, thus inhibiting
downstream substrate phosphorylation and causing cell cycle arrest (reduced proliferation)
at the G1/S transition and subsequent suppression of ITLSs (Figure 8D). It should be noted
however that many other (physiological, non-genetic) events can induce a similar
depolarization as that initiated by oncogene function, thus inducing the rest of the
downstream steps in this tumorigenesis pathway without necessitating oncogenic mutation.


[PAGE 13] Cancer: a disease of geometry?

Given the data implicating physiological cell properties and bioelectric cell:cell
communication in cancer and its normalization, it is important to place this body of work in
the context of developmental signaling. Bioelectric gradients are one component of
morphogenetic cues mediating positional information, tissue specification, and intercellular
coordination [14,43].

[PAGE 13] Morphogenetic Field as tumor suppressor: importance of community

The sum total of the instructive patterning signals that impinge upon cells in the organism
(Figure 9A) is referred to as the Morphogenetic Field [14,18,309,310]. This instructive
information is mediated by a range of dynamically-varying spatio-temporal gradients of
secreted biochemical factors, extracellular matrix properties, stresses/strains/stiffness values,
and electric properties. Disturbances of the normal interactions between cells and the signals
that normally orchestrate individual cell activities into maintenance of host tissues and
organs can manifest as cancer. The hypothesis that cancer is fundamentally a phenomenon at
the level of multicellular organization makes a number of unique predictions confirmed by
experimental data (that are not predicted by the somatic mutation model). For example, one
way to perturb field structure is to introduce ectopic organizer nodes. Indeed, implantation
of early embryos (which organize their own field of signals) under the kidney capsule of an
adult makes transplantable malignant teratomas despite a lack of any infective, chemical, or
radiation initiator to cause genetic damage [8], while normal adult Xenopus kidney
implanted in the non-amputated forelimbs of recently-etamorphosed larvae will make
lymphosarcomas as well as accessory limb structures [311]. Implantation of mouse embryos
into adults causes teratocarcinomas [312], possibly due to an interference between the host
and implanted embryo's morphogenetic field signals.

Cancerous failure of morphostasis can occur because a morphogenetic field is missing,
altered, or not successfully perceived (all three of which can occur due to genetic or
physiological state change). Cells in dispersed monolayer culture are several orders of
magnitude more sensitive to chemical carcinogenesis than are organized tissues within an
intact organism [313], and placing normal primary mammalian cells in culture results in the
appearance of cells with malignant potential [313–316]. Chick embryos infected with the v-
Src virus exhibit no malignant phenotype, but the same cells in culture undergo massive
transformation [317]. A number of recent papers stress the suppressive nature of signals
from neighboring tissues [4,9,10,29]. Consistently, re-establishing appropriate interactions
of human cancer cells with the microenvironment and normal neighbors underlies the
observed reversion of malignant phenotype in a number of cell lines [318–320].

Consistent with the need for cell: cell interactions in suppressing cancer are data showing
that tumorigenesis is promoted when cells are isolated from their neighbors (and thus from
the morphogenetic guidance they would otherwise receive) by physical barriers. Implanting
into connective tissue of the rat rectangles of inert plastic, metal foil, or glass cover slips
induces sarcomas when the material is >1cm². If the material is perforated, the incidence is
reduced, and the effect does not occur with powders of the same material (which actually

[PAGE 13] Cancer: a disease of geometry?
Given the data implicating physiological cell properties and bioelectric cell:cell
communication in cancer and its normalization, it is important to place this body of work in
the context of developmental signaling. Bioelectric gradients are one component of
morphogenetic cues mediating positional information, tissue specification, and intercellular
coordination [14,43].

Morphogenetic Field as tumor suppressor: importance of community
The sum total of the instructive patterning signals that impinge upon cells in the organism
(Figure 9A) is referred to as the Morphogenetic Field [14,18,309,310]. This instructive
information is mediated by a range of dynamically-varying spatio-temporal gradients of
secreted biochemical factors, extracellular matrix properties, stresses/strains/stiffness values,
and electric properties. Disturbances of the normal interactions between cells and the signals
that normally orchestrate individual cell activities into maintenance of host tissues and
organs can manifest as cancer. The hypothesis that cancer is fundamentally a phenomenon at
the level of multicellular organization makes a number of unique predictions confirmed by
experimental data (that are not predicted by the somatic mutation model). For example, one
way to perturb field structure is to introduce ectopic organizer nodes. Indeed, implantation
of early embryos (which organize their own field of signals) under the kidney capsule of an
adult makes transplantable malignant teratomas despite a lack of any infective, chemical, or
radiation initiator to cause genetic damage [8], while normal adult Xenopus kidney
implanted in the non-amputated forelimbs of recently-etamorphosed larvae will make
lymphosarcomas as well as accessory limb structures [311]. Implantation of mouse embryos
into adults causes teratocarcinomas [312], possibly due to an interference between the host
and implanted embryo's morphogenetic field signals.

Cancerous failure of morphostasis can occur because a morphogenetic field is missing,
altered, or not successfully perceived (all three of which can occur due to genetic or
physiological state change). Cells in dispersed monolayer culture are several orders of
magnitude more sensitive to chemical carcinogenesis than are organized tissues within an
intact organism [313], and placing normal primary mammalian cells in culture results in the
appearance of cells with malignant potential [313–316]. Chick embryos infected with the v-
Src virus exhibit no malignant phenotype, but the same cells in culture undergo massive
transformation [317]. A number of recent papers stress the suppressive nature of signals
from neighboring tissues [4,9,10,29]. Consistently, re-establishing appropriate interactions
of human cancer cells with the microenvironment and normal neighbors underlies the
observed reversion of malignant phenotype in a number of cell lines [318–320].

Consistent with the need for cell: cell interactions in suppressing cancer are data showing
that tumorigenesis is promoted when cells are isolated from their neighbors (and thus from
the morphogenetic guidance they would otherwise receive) by physical barriers. Implanting
into connective tissue of the rat rectangles of inert plastic, metal foil, or glass cover slips
induces sarcomas when the material is >1cm². If the material is perforated, the incidence is
reduced, and the effect does not occur with powders of the same material (which actually
increases surface area, ruling out chemical induction or genetic damage mechanisms) [321-
324].

[PAGE 14] More recent data has focused attention on interruption of cell:cell communication via ions
and other small molecules through gap junctions (GJs) – aqueous channels made of
connexin proteins that allow physiological signaling directly between the cytoplasmic
interiors of docking adjacent cells [325–330]. For example, Connexin32-deficient mice have
a 25-fold increased incidence of spontaneous liver tumors [331]. Gap junctional isolation is
known to be a tumor-promoting agent [330,332–337], although there are counter-examples
[338]. Active GJ communication allows cells to make sophisticated decisions comparing
relative levels of specific compounds between themselves and their neighbors [339] and thus
can underlie the transmission of physiological patterning signals [89,90,114,340-347].

Another mechanism of coordination across large cell fields that was recently implicated in
cancer is the planar cell polarity (PCP) pathway – a set of protein components designed to
coordinate orientation and function of cells over long distances [348]. PCP has now been
shown to function as a non-canonical tumor suppressor [349,350]. While the direct causal
relationship between loss of PCP and tumor initiation in humans is not yet proven, it is clear
that loss of polarity can be an initiating event in tumor formation in Drosophila [351].
Consistent with conserved mechanisms underlying coordination and maintenance of long-
range order in cancer and normal development, PCP is also involved in dynamic
morphostasis: grafts of embryonic skin (after the planar polarity of hair becomes evident),
when implanted into adults, realign their hair polarity to match that of the hosts [352] – this
dynamic readjustment to local conditions is a factor that distinguishes cancerous tissue from
its normal counterpart (see below). PCP allows cells to align axes orthogonal to their apical-
basal polarity with each other, and with major anatomical axes of the organism, linking
large-scale order with regulation of single-cell behavior.

Another mechanism used to coordinate cell activity away from cancer is communication via
the nervous system. Tumors are readily induced by denervation in salivary organ and
alimentary canal in cockroach [353,354] and in mammalian skin [355]. Similarly, tumors are
chemically induced more easily in denervated rabbit ears as compared with contralateral
controls bearing normal innervation [355]; the same has been observed in sarcomas
implanted into normal or denervated frog limbs [356]. These remarkable results are
predicted by models in which nervous system components transmit long-range
morphogenetic field cues [357–360], but have been unfortunately neglected in the modern
literature focused on DNA. Much works remains to characterize the role of the nervous
system in providing information and cancer-suppressive cues to existing adult tissue, and to
dissect which signals are broadcast via the long-range communication systems provided by
planar cell polarity, nerves, and gap-junctional networks.

[PAGE 14] Positional information and cancer
Models of suppression of cancer by long-range morphogenetic cues, as opposed to simpler
models of growth-inhibitory signals from any normal neighbors, predict that tumorigenesis
would be modulated by global position within the host, as are events operating during
embryonic development and regeneration. Microarray analysis reveals quite different

[PAGE 15] profiles of human glioma cell lines grown in leg vs. brain [361]. Moreover, tumors grow on
posterior regions of Triturus less readily than they do on anterior regions [362], and
numerous such differences are observed in human tumors as well [363–368]. These studies
suggest a link between large-scale axial patterning in adult organisms and the potential for
failed perception of morphogenetic cues by cells.

A most impressive example of the importance of location and environment in cancer growth
is provided by patients with peritoneo-venous shunts, who have a steady infusion of
peritoneal fluid that carries billions of desquamated cancer cells into the systemic
circulation, for months or years [7]. Known metastases in some organs before insertion of
the shunt exhibited additional deposits in the same organs but not anywhere else, despite
millions of viable cancer cells being distributed to every organ. This work (which ruled out
immune clearance of cancer cells) revealed that the disseminating cancer cells were capable
of establishing secondary tumor colonies in some anatomical sites in a given patient but
could not do so in other organs, raising the question of whether some body regions have
more active morphostasis pathways.

Even more interestingly, surgical disruption of normal topographical tissue relationships
tends to induce cancer, which suggests a feedback model where the morphogenetic field can
be altered by scrambled anatomy, or perhaps difficulty in cells' reading instructions at the
borders of fields that are not supposed to be geometrically adjacent. For example, despite
lack of DNA damage or cytotoxic chemical stressor, transplantation of rat testis to the spleen
induces formation of interstitial cell tumors [369], while normal rat ovary tissue put into
normal rat spleen results in malignant neoplasm [370]. Cancer thus is not only a disruption
of normal patterning within the tumor but also reveals an interplay between its activity and
the context of the large-scale spatial organization of the host.

[PAGE 15] Normalization of cancer by developmental and regenerative patterning
The morphogenetic field ought to be the most active and accessible during embryogenesis. It
is thus not surprising that despite considerable malignancy and aneuploidy, tumor cells
introduced into wild-type embryos become integrated as normal tissue [371–381]. Human
metastatic melanoma cells injected into zebrafish embryos acquire a non-neoplastic
phenotype, but form tumors when injected into zebrafish after organogenesis [382,383].
Likewise, implanted sarcoma progressed in 80% of adult rats but only in 6.4% of rat
embryos. Similar data have been recently shown for chick and other kinds of embryos that
are able to tame aggressive cancer cells when these are implanted [383–386]. Cancer
normalization can occur cell-autonomously [387], or induced by communication from other
cells, such as the mammary stroma [371,388–393]. Indeed the embryonic field present in the
blastocyst can normalize several types of cancer cells including those isolated from
embryonic carcinoma, leukemia and neuroblastoma [381], although the limits of this
normalization process (with respect to large-scale chromosome aberrations found in some
tumors) remain to be probed fully. Thus, active patterning signals can normalize cancer
(over-ride genetic defects and reboot cell behavior programs); this is a finding that is not
predicted by the cell-level view of cancer as embryos have high levels of many growth

[PAGE 16] factors that could be expected to potentiate tumor growth (and do, in experimental contexts
such as cell culture which is devoid of large-scale patterning structure).

Tumors have also been described as wounds that do not heal – areas of disruption and cell
growth without an appropriate patterning program that reaches a terminal goal state
[149,394]. This analogy is supported by profiling data showing the molecular similarity of
repair vs. carcinoma in renal tissue [149]. Successful tumors have developed the capacity to
preempt and subvert the wound-healing response of the host [395]. What about wounds that
not only heal but successfully rebuild a missing structure? Some animals, such as
salamanders, can regenerate entire limbs, eyes, hearts, and jaws. Even mammals regenerate
some organs (e.g., liver in humans, and antlers – meters of innervation, bone, and skin – in
deer).

It has been long known that regeneration and cancer are closely related [396–401]. Highly-
regenerative organisms are resistant to carcinogenesis and indeed activating regenerative
response can normalize existing tumors [396–399,401–405], although this does not always
occur [406]. The inverse relationship between regeneration and cancer susceptibility
[407,408] is more compatible with the importance of morphogenetic field guidance than
with cancer risk associated with the presence of highly-active, undifferentiated cells [18].
Mammalian liver regeneration can overcome cancer - early nodules initiated by carcinogens
are remodeled to normal-appearing liver [409,410], hepatocarcinoma cells can be
normalized by injection into wild-type liver [411,412], and over 95% of nascent tumor sites
remodel into normal tissue by the highly-regenerative liver [413–415]. In zebrafish brain
regeneration, a remarkable degree of aneuploidy does not lead to cancer -an active
patterning program trumps chromosomal damage [416], and amphibian limb regeneration
can likewise normalize tumors [31,32,400]. Thus, tumors may be wounds that do not
pattern.

Modern molecular model systems are now available for the study of these still poorly-
understood mechanisms: regeneration of the zebrafish tail prevented tumor formation from
BRAFV600E mutation + p53 knockout [417], offering the opportunity to use the numerous
available zebrafish reporter lines and functional morpholino strategies to investigate the
relationship between regeneration and tumorigenesis. Remarkably, such influence is not
necessarily local. Induction of anterior regeneration in planaria turns posterior infiltrating
tumors into differentiated accessory organs such as the pharynx [362], which suggests the
presence of regulatory long-range signals that are initiated by large-scale regeneration. It is
likely that the normalization of tumors by active remodeling represents one of the most
profound and exciting areas for future work in understanding morphogenetic fields and their
interpretation by growing tissue.

Interestingly, the interplay between proper patterning and cancer suppression is retained
throughout life; for example, if the endocrine gland is removed in Dixippus, regenerative
capacity is lost, and spontaneous tumors begin to appear [418–421]. Work in highly-
regenerative model species such as amphibia and some invertebrates is likely to be the
fastest route to understanding this fascinating phenomenon of tumor and cancer cell
reprogramming but it is important to note that these signaling pathways are likely to be of

[PAGE 17] relevance to human patients. For example, childhood neuroblastoma has a high rate of
spontaneous regression [422,423], and a number of other cancers often regress
spontaneously [7]. The efforts of regenerative medicine to improve regeneration prospects in
man may thus have a significant side benefit of impacting cancer treatment.

[PAGE 17] Explanations at above the single-cell level-Is cancer fundamentally a cell-level
property or a multicellular phenomenon that, like the wetness of water, which is not
applicable to individual H2O molecules, applies only to collections of cells and characterizes
the interactions between them? The current paradigm focuses on cell-level activity
(proliferation, differentiation, migration), but tissue- or organ-level systems properties might
be the right basal concepts with which to formulate models and intervention modalities
[424-427].

The difference between these approaches is not mere philosophy – it has testable
implications that allow data to distinguish between the two classes of models. For example,
a focus on cell cycle checkpoints and TGF-ẞ molecules (a view at the cell level) leads to the
prediction that cancer and regenerative potential should go together: animals with ready
access to plastic, highly proliferative cells should be prone to neoplasia, and long-lived
humans would be forever barred from powerful regenerative pathways because of the
evolutionary pressure to suppress cancer over decades. Conversely, a morphogenetic field
model (cancer as a failure to transmit or receive anatomical cues) suggests that regeneration
and cancer should be inversely related, as robust patterning pathways necessary for
regenerating complex organs from new cell growth would also keep cells within a coherent
morphological plan and away from tumorigenesis during normal lifespan.

In fact, the most highly regenerative animals tend to have the lowest incidence of cancer
[396,399-401]. Moreover, if a tumor is induced on the limb of a salamander and the limb is
amputated through the tumor (Figure 9B), the remaining cancer tissue becomes part of the
newly regenerating limb [396–401]! This readily illustrates the profound relationship
between cancer and regeneration and the importance of studying systems-level concepts (the
mechanistic details of “exerting strong patterning control at the level of a whole
appendage") for what is often thought of as a cellular- or gene-level process. It also suggests
a highly optimistic view of the potential for regenerative pattern control in human cancer
medicine.

As in regenerative medicine, the answer to this question impacts treatment strategies: do we
micromanage individual gene products, or attempt to initiate complex patterning cascades?
Up-regulating embryonic genes in adults results in cancer [428–430], while, as discussed
above, inducing embryonic genetic programs leads to cancer normalization [18]. Moreover,
drugs that target upstream functions in signaling networks have less general toxicity than
those that interact with targets further downstream [431]; this is consistent with the view that
the right level of intervention to optimize effectiveness and compatibility with overall health
(lack of toxicity) is by activating large-scale physiological modules that have been evolved
to implement mutually compatible (healthful) downstream events, instead of specifically
impacting individual downstream players which may induce unwanted interference with
other functions in the organism.

Chernet and Levin
Page 17
relevance to human patients. For example, childhood neuroblastoma has a high rate of
spontaneous regression [422,423], and a number of other cancers often regress
spontaneously [7]. The efforts of regenerative medicine to improve regeneration prospects in
man may thus have a significant side benefit of impacting cancer treatment.

Explanations at above the single-cell level-Is cancer fundamentally a cell-level
property or a multicellular phenomenon that, like the wetness of water, which is not
applicable to individual H2O molecules, applies only to collections of cells and characterizes
the interactions between them? The current paradigm focuses on cell-level activity
(proliferation, differentiation, migration), but tissue- or organ-level systems properties might
be the right basal concepts with which to formulate models and intervention modalities
[424-427].

The difference between these approaches is not mere philosophy – it has testable
implications that allow data to distinguish between the two classes of models. For example,
a focus on cell cycle checkpoints and TGF-ẞ molecules (a view at the cell level) leads to the
prediction that cancer and regenerative potential should go together: animals with ready
access to plastic, highly proliferative cells should be prone to neoplasia, and long-lived
humans would be forever barred from powerful regenerative pathways because of the
evolutionary pressure to suppress cancer over decades. Conversely, a morphogenetic field
model (cancer as a failure to transmit or receive anatomical cues) suggests that regeneration
and cancer should be inversely related, as robust patterning pathways necessary for
regenerating complex organs from new cell growth would also keep cells within a coherent
morphological plan and away from tumorigenesis during normal lifespan.

In fact, the most highly regenerative animals tend to have the lowest incidence of cancer
[396,399-401]. Moreover, if a tumor is induced on the limb of a salamander and the limb is
amputated through the tumor (Figure 9B), the remaining cancer tissue becomes part of the
newly regenerating limb [396–401]! This readily illustrates the profound relationship
between cancer and regeneration and the importance of studying systems-level concepts (the
mechanistic details of “exerting strong patterning control at the level of a whole
appendage") for what is often thought of as a cellular- or gene-level process. It also suggests
a highly optimistic view of the potential for regenerative pattern control in human cancer
medicine.

As in regenerative medicine, the answer to this question impacts treatment strategies: do we
micromanage individual gene products, or attempt to initiate complex patterning cascades?
Up-regulating embryonic genes in adults results in cancer [428–430], while, as discussed
above, inducing embryonic genetic programs leads to cancer normalization [18]. Moreover,
drugs that target upstream functions in signaling networks have less general toxicity than
those that interact with targets further downstream [431]; this is consistent with the view that
the right level of intervention to optimize effectiveness and compatibility with overall health
(lack of toxicity) is by activating large-scale physiological modules that have been evolved
to implement mutually compatible (healthful) downstream events, instead of specifically
impacting individual downstream players which may induce unwanted interference with
other functions in the organism.


Page 18
A closely related question to the scale and level of organization of cancer state is the spatial
distance over which the disturbance acts [432-434]. In mammalian breast cancer [292] and
frog melanoma-like transformation [60,61], clear roles for non-local (long-range) influence
over carcinogenesis have been found and can now be dissected. This is clinically relevant, as
seen in field effects in many different kinds of cancer in which surrogate sites are not
necessarily adjacent to the main tumor [435,436]. The characteristic size scale of the "cancer
field" is still not mechanistically understood and is relevant not only for understanding the
basic biology of signaling but for designing detection and treatment modalities intending to
impact specific tumor sites. Although most work on cell:cell interactions today deals with
chemical gradients as a signaling modality, bioelectricity is an ideal medium for long-range
coordination and information exchange among cells during pattern maintenance and repair.

[PAGE 18] Future Prospects/Speculations

[PAGE 18] Tumor boundaries and selves
The fundamental fact of cancer is that cells cease to work towards the anatomical needs of a
host organism and narrow their dynamic goal-seeking behavior to the level of single cells –
an increase in “selfish” behavior away from the normal cooperativity of multicellular life.
Cancer could result from a failure of the host to impose or transmit necessary patterning
information within a particular region; it is also possible that tumor cells are those that
stopped attending to the morphogenetic field cues [27,349,398]. Anticipating recent
discoveries of the importance of gap-junction cell:cell communication for planarian
regenerative patterning [112,114], in 1965 Seilern-Aspang described planarian experiments
in which a carcinogen led to formation of many head teratomas with irregular nerves and un-
oriented eyes concluding that “the cell-isolating action of the carcinogen prevents formation
of a single morphogenetic field and leads to the establishment of several separated fields of
reduced dimensions” [362]. Thus, tumors could also represent establishment of a local
"subfield" – a fragmentation of the host's morphogenetic field such that integration with the
host body plan is lost. Unlike normal somatic tissues, which remodel when transplanted into
foreign locations [437–439], the histopathological structure of metastasis reflects the tissue
of origin, not of their destination [8], confirming an inability to respond to neighboring
signals such as positional information and remodeling cues.

Interestingly, cancer is not only a loss of patterning, but also a coherent, goal-seeking
subsystem: tumors are not just aggregates of replicating neoplastic cells but complex living
entities composed of numerous cell types that work together to acquire nutrients, survive,
and evade the efforts of an environment that is trying to kill them [5,440]. One way to model
such changes in dynamics is as a reduced scope of “self” – the view that a tumor is, in some
practical sense, an independent organism [441] with its own (primitive) morphogenetic field.
In a tumor, the boundary of self has been reduced from the whole body to that of a much
smaller structure, making the rest of the body just part of the pseudo-organism's outside
environment. Such a view is suggested by a number of findings. First, histological analysis
indicates that tumors can indeed be regarded as complex tissues with a distinct internal
organization [314,442]. Tumors reproduce themselves via metastasis, and execute many
adaptive strategies (such as up-regulating multi-drug resistance proteins in the face of


Page 19
chemotherapy) to preserve their homeostasis and existence – just as organisms within an
ecological niche do [443–445]. Much like organisms maintaining morphostasis, tumors
maintain their identity during massive cell turnover during selection for founder cells
resistant to chemotherapy drugs [446]. Recent work describes the highly malignant brain
tumor as an "opportunistic, self-organizing, and adaptive complex dynamic biosystem”
[447]; proper characterization of the essential principles predictive of the properties of tumor
invasion makes uses of concepts such as least resistance, most permission, and highest
attraction - these are systems-level, goal-directed elements that are very compatible with the
conceptual modeling techniques suggested for understanding embryogenesis and
regeneration of whole organisms.

The defection of cells from the goal states of the body to those of a much smaller entity (a
tumor, or perhaps individual cells) implements a contraction of the functional boundaries of
the self-organizing system [448,449]. Tumors of course pursue goals quite at odds with
those of their host. “Glioma cells are ill-equipped to participate in ion and amino acid
homeostasis, those important altruistic tasks performed by their nonmalignant counterparts.
Instead, gliomas are more concerned about their relentless growth and invasive migration”
[450]. Interestingly, cooperation occurs among the tumor cells that can be analyzed via the
same mathematical tools that explain cooperation and competition among somatic cells and
members of societal groups [339,451,452]. While tumors typically lose heterologous gap-
junctional communication to surrounding stroma, they often maintain good gap junctional
connections among their own cells. Interestingly, gap-junctional connections have been
proposed as a mechanism by which cells can recognize “self” [453,454].

The questions of size control and field boundaries are central to developmental biology as
well as cancer. During planarian regeneration, a regenerating head will inhibit the formation
of heads elsewhere, but parts of the regenerating head do not inhibit the rest of that same
head from forming. A specific voltage range causes tissues to reorganize into eyes [110], but
these eyes are of normal (limited) size, and at the same time contain numerous distinct
tissues that clearly result from a process more complex than simple control of cell fate and
differentiation by a resting potential value. To really understand the fascinating ability of
active morphogenetic fields during regeneration to normalize or prevent tumors will require
new, molecularly-tractable models of tumor normalization. Axolotls are a powerful system
in which this could readily be dissected [455,456]. Future work must uncover the
mechanisms that establish size and scope of morphogenetic fields, to understand how
boundaries are established and altered during pattern formation. Cybernetic models of goal-
seeking behavior among dynamical systems such as embryos and tumors are needed to
understand the kinds of signals that can be manipulated for desired outcomes in regenerative
biomedicine and oncology contexts [457–459].

[PAGE 19] Genetics and physiology
One of the most important lessons to come from the recent work on bioelectrical controls of
morphology is the fact that significant patterning information can be generated and
maintained at the level of physiology and de-coupled from changes in transcription and
translation (Figure 10). While biophysical events are certainly transduced into genetic


Page 20
cascades, the laws of physics and the post-translational gating of channel and pump proteins
guarantee that cells expressing precisely the same complement of proteins can be in very
different bioelectrical states. Of course this is akin to familiar phenomena such as action
potentials propagating down an axon and calcium fertilization waves moving over an
oocyte, neither of which requires changes in mRNA or protein levels for the dynamics of
bioelectrical cell state to evolve. On longer time scales, networks of voltage-gated ion
channels and voltage-regulated gap junctional current paths can form cell fields with rich
feedback dynamics in the distribution of voltage levels that are not at all captured by
analysis of protein content. Protein profile does not determine physiological state: not only
can cells with the same protein be in different physiological states, cells in very similar
physiological states could reach them by making use of very different ion channels. The
ability of many different channels to be combined towards the same physiological end-goal
results in a huge degree of compensation and redundancy [460]; this is a benefit for ensuring
physiological robustness of bioelectrical control systems, but also means that the popular
single-channel knockout experiments will rarely reveal phenotypes indicative of the
patterning roles of transmembrane voltage potentials.

As seen in the several examples discussed in detail above, changes in bioelectric state can
alter patterning and induce/suppress tumorigenesis without DNA damage, and by the
modulation of any number of channels/pumps at the post-translational level. Cracking the
bioelectrical code to allow prevention and normalization of cancer will require fleshing out
the interaction between information stored in truly epigenetic (in the original sense of the
word) physiological networks, transcriptional responses, and the goal-seeking control
algorithms of single cells and multicellular host organisms. This in turn will require new
technique development - establishment of model systems in which voltage can be controlled
directly in any cell/tissue of interest; one exciting candidate is the extension of optogenetics
to non-neural, non-excitable tissues [461,462], and conceptual apparatus for modeling
information processing and autonomous dynamical system properties in silico that can be
applied to the initiation and reprogramming of cancer in vivo.

[PAGE 20] Speculations: cancer as a failure of morphogenetic field memory
Taken together, recent and classical data suggest that morphogenesis and morphostasis are
core concepts unifying three major areas of study – development, regeneration, and cancer.
Understanding the ability of systems to self-assemble complex anatomy, to repair damage,
and maintain shape against aging and cancer is paramount to progress in all three fields, and
will drive radical advances in biomedicine [463]. It is imperative that we identify and
quantitatively model the information-processing and computational activities of patterning
systems to gain control of molecular mechanisms by which morphogenetic information
orchestrates low-level (cell) behaviors towards the patterning needs of the host. Cancer
biology may be an ideal context in which to consider predictive, quantitative models of top-
down causation and control as an alternative to the current paradigm focused on molecular
pathways and emergence [464–468]. What criteria (degree of predictive control in
functional experiments? parsimony of model? conformance with reductionism?) are to be
used to decide among top-down and bottom-up models? This has important implications
beyond philosophy and basic developmental biology. Our choice of strategies for


Page 21
regenerative and cancer medicine depends crucially on finding the easiest path towards
gaining rational control over complex biological shapes and understanding the still
mysterious link between the equally rapid growth of cancer vs. regenerative repair.

Bioelectric events have properties that make them ideal components for implementing the
morphogenetic field, and indeed recent data has shown that their manipulation is a good
entry-point into a molecular-level understanding of these mechanisms [80,469].
Bioelectricity is central to development, regeneration, and cancer. But the transformative
impact of integrating biophysics into our genetic paradigm will be the ability to move
beyond Vmem in single cells and understand the dynamics of multicellular bioelectric
networks and how they store and specify shape. A key next step is the construction of
specific dynamical systems models of patterning information stored in real-time
physiological networks. Multidimensional spaces of many different bioelectric
measurements will require concerted physiomics profiling efforts; such data may turn out to
contain attractors that map to anatomical states, and may implement the “dynamically
preformed morph” envisioned by Gurwitsch [470].

The data of modern bioelectricity reveal the instructive control of shape (and its
derangement during cancer) by endogenous voltage gradients and ion currents. Dynamic
control of morphogenesis requires processing large amounts of information about tissue and
organ structure, as well as a mechanism for ceasing growth when particular target
morphology has been reached (a step that is likely to be completely short-circuited in
tumors). Fortunately, we have two solid precedents for storing information in dynamic
patterns of ion flow. The first is storage of bits in a magnetic core memory – the information
is literally encoded in the direction of ion flows and their resulting magnetic fields. Much as
the ion flows among electrically active cells are invisible to techniques focused on the
material structure of cells and the mRNA/proteins expressed in them, the information
content of electronic storage media is invisible to a description of the material components
of a computer memory system - energy flow patterns can store distinct bits among identical
bi-stable units, whether they are implemented in cells [471-473] or transistor flip-flop
circuits.

Even more simply, the conservation of basic molecular elements in the central nervous
system and in non-neural embryonic cells reminds us that cognitive science has a mature
and well-developed history of investigating spatial maps encoded in the dynamics of
electrically-active cells - navigational memory in the brain [474,475]. The neurobehavioral
community is quite comfortable with the storage of memory in neural networks, and
techniques and results in this field should be combined with modern understanding of
pattern formation and disorders. After all, both study information – spatial information
processed in reorganization of geometry (morphogenesis), and temporal information
remembered as patterns from the environment (learning and memory); the parallels in
information-processing algorithms of neural networks and developmental dynamics was
pointed out by Grossberg decades ago [476], but not seriously investigated yet. Not
surprisingly, ion translocators are involved in learning and memory storage [477–479],
placing these molecules at an important focal point at the intersection of morphogenesis and
cognition. Likewise, heart cells have been modeled as a neural-like network to explain

Chernet and Levin
Page 21
regenerative and cancer medicine depends crucially on finding the easiest path towards
gaining rational control over complex biological shapes and understanding the still
mysterious link between the equally rapid growth of cancer vs. regenerative repair.
Bioelectric events have properties that make them ideal components for implementing the
morphogenetic field, and indeed recent data has shown that their manipulation is a good
entry-point into a molecular-level understanding of these mechanisms [80,469].
Bioelectricity is central to development, regeneration, and cancer. But the transformative
impact of integrating biophysics into our genetic paradigm will be the ability to move
beyond Vmem in single cells and understand the dynamics of multicellular bioelectric
networks and how they store and specify shape. A key next step is the construction of
specific dynamical systems models of patterning information stored in real-time
physiological networks. Multidimensional spaces of many different bioelectric
measurements will require concerted physiomics profiling efforts; such data may turn out to
contain attractors that map to anatomical states, and may implement the “dynamically
preformed morph” envisioned by Gurwitsch [470].

The data of modern bioelectricity reveal the instructive control of shape (and its
derangement during cancer) by endogenous voltage gradients and ion currents. Dynamic
control of morphogenesis requires processing large amounts of information about tissue and
organ structure, as well as a mechanism for ceasing growth when particular target
morphology has been reached (a step that is likely to be completely short-circuited in
tumors). Fortunately, we have two solid precedents for storing information in dynamic
patterns of ion flow. The first is storage of bits in a magnetic core memory – the information
is literally encoded in the direction of ion flows and their resulting magnetic fields. Much as
the ion flows among electrically active cells are invisible to techniques focused on the
material structure of cells and the mRNA/proteins expressed in them, the information
content of electronic storage media is invisible to a description of the material components
of a computer memory system - energy flow patterns can store distinct bits among identical
bi-stable units, whether they are implemented in cells [471-473] or transistor flip-flop
circuits.

Even more simply, the conservation of basic molecular elements in the central nervous
system and in non-neural embryonic cells reminds us that cognitive science has a mature
and well-developed history of investigating spatial maps encoded in the dynamics of
electrically-active cells - navigational memory in the brain [474,475]. The neurobehavioral
community is quite comfortable with the storage of memory in neural networks, and
techniques and results in this field should be combined with modern understanding of
pattern formation and disorders. After all, both study information – spatial information
processed in reorganization of geometry (morphogenesis), and temporal information
remembered as patterns from the environment (learning and memory); the parallels in
information-processing algorithms of neural networks and developmental dynamics was
pointed out by Grossberg decades ago [476], but not seriously investigated yet. Not
surprisingly, ion translocators are involved in learning and memory storage [477–479],
placing these molecules at an important focal point at the intersection of morphogenesis and
cognition. Likewise, heart cells have been modeled as a neural-like network to explain

Page 22
memory effects relevant to remodeling [471,480]. While most somatic cells process voltage
change signals much more slowly than do rapidly spiking neurons, it is tempting to
speculate that the analogy may indicate a real, mechanistic relationship. Such computational
tissues would be ideal media in which to store and manipulate the information used by
morphogenetic fields. Given that many cell types are communicating electrically via
membrane potential and highly-tunable electric synapses, gap junctions [88,481–483], there
may not be any fundamental difference between the information-processing functions of
neural networks and similar electrical dynamics in non-neural cells. Thus, cancer could be a
regenerative response that cannot remember what target morphology is to be recognized as
the "end of growth signal", and a reprogramming solution could be sought in repairing the
ability of cells to access the electrically-mediated memory of appropriate tissue organization
and the cell behaviors that are needed to achieve that state.

If these highly speculative parallels hold, many novel, mechanistically-tractable questions
are suggested with respect to how normal tissue architecture is “remembered” in cell
networks and what processes of memory failure may result in neoplasm. For example, the
glutamate receptor, metabotropic [1], also known as GRM1, is an ion channel and an
oncogene; notably, the knockout mice exhibited problems with long-term potentiation
(memory) [484–488]. Likewise, signaling via the neurotransmitter serotonin has been
implicated in cancer [60,281,489–491]. The use of cognitive modulator compounds in
cancer assays is being pursued in our lab, to test predictions of a hypothesis linking
bioelectric mediation of morphogenetic cues, stored memory of correct organ/tissue
morphology, and its disruption in cancer.

[PAGE 22] Conclusion and Summary
Much classical and recent data reveal that cancer is not simply a result of damaged genomes
but rather involves a disruption of normal developmental mechanisms and cell:cell
communication across large distances. It is now known that endogenous bioelectrical
gradients underlie an important layer of such cell coordination, and it is thus not surprising
that ion channels are increasingly revealed as not only markers of the transformed state but
also bona fide oncogenes and thus important drug targets. Work in the amphibian model
demonstrated that depolarization of resting potential by voltage-sensitive fluorescent dyes is
a promising modality for detecting cancer in vivo. Moreover, depolarization of key cell
groups in the body is sufficient to activate metastatic behavior in other cell types through a
serotonergic signaling mechanism. Finally, oncogene-induced tumor structure formation
requires depolarization, and artificial hyperpolarization is able to suppress this effect, despite
high levels of oncogene protein, through a butyrate and histone deacetylate mechanism.
Thus, the tumor microenvironment is not only chemical but also bioelectrical [492]; indeed,
it may function over considerable distances. Transformative applications in cancer medicine
and beyond await our molecular dissection of the bioelectrical and other mechanisms by
which active morphogenesis and nervous system activity suppresses tumorigenesis, and
regenerative and embryonic environments actively reprogram tumors.


Page 23
[PAGE 23] Acknowledgments
This paper is dedicated H. S. Burr, an early pioneer of non-local bioelectric field influences in cancer, and to the
non-traditional model species - animals rarely used in modern molecular approaches, which have facilitated the
discovery of remarkable and fundamental relationships between cancer and normal patterning processes. We thank
Jessica Mustard and Jean-Francois Pare for helpful comments on a draft of this manuscript, and Vaibhav Pai for
assistance with Oncomine data searches. This work was supported by the National Institutes of Health [grant
numbers AR061988 and AR055993] and the G. Harold and Leila Y. Mathers Charitable Foundation.


Page 24

Page 25

49. Rajnicek AM, Foubister LE, McCaig CD. Growth cone steering by a physiological electric field
requires dynamic microtubules, microfilaments and Rac-mediated filopodial asymmetry. J Cell
Sci. 2006; 119:1736-1745. [PubMed: 16595545]
50. Levin M, Stevenson CG. Regulation of cell behavior and tissue patterning by bioelectrical signals:
challenges and opportunities for biomedical engineering. Annu Rev Biomed Eng. 2012; 14:295-
323. [PubMed: 22809139]
51. Becchetti A. Ion channels and transporters in cancer. 1. Ion channels and cell proliferation in
cancer. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol. 2011; 301:C255–265. [PubMed: 21430288]
52. Prevarskaya N, Skryma R, Shuba Y. Ion channels and the hallmarks of cancer. Trends Mol Med.
2010; 16:107-121. [PubMed: 20167536]
53. Pardo LA, Contreras-Jurado C, Zientkowska M, Alves F, Stühmer W. Role of voltage-gated
potassium channels in cancer. J Membr Biol. 2005; 205:115–124. [PubMed: 16362499]
54. Kunzelmann K. Ion channels and cancer. J Membr Biol. 2005; 205:159-173. [PubMed: 16362504]
55. Stock C, Ludwig FT, Hanley PJ, Schwab A. Roles of ion transport in control of cell motility.
Compr Physiol. 2013; 3:59–119. [PubMed: 23720281]
56. Sun YS, Peng SW, Lin KH, Cheng JY. Electrotaxis of lung cancer cells in ordered three-
dimensional scaffolds. Biomicrofluidics. 2012; 6:14102–1410214. [PubMed: 22288000]
57. Yan X, Han J, Zhang Z, Wang J, Cheng Q, et al. Lung cancer A549 cells migrate directionally in
DC electric fields with polarized and activated EGFRs. Bioelectromagnetics. 2009; 30:29–35.
[PubMed: 18618607]
58. Pu J, McCaig CD, Cao L, Zhao Z, Segall JE, et al. EGF receptor signalling is essential for electric-
field-directed migration of breast cancer cells. J Cell Sci. 2007; 120:3395–3403. [PubMed:
17881501]
59. Yao L, Pandit A, Yao S, McCaig CD. Electric field-guided neuron migration: a novel approach in
neurogenesis. Tissue Eng Part B Rev. 2011; 17:143-153. [PubMed: 21275787]
60. Blackiston D, Adams DS, Lemire JM, Lobikin M, Levin M. Transmembrane potential of GlyCl-
expressing instructor cells induces a neoplastic-like conversion of melanocytes via a serotonergic
pathway. Dis Model Mech. 2011; 4:67–85. [PubMed: 20959630]
61. Morokuma J, Blackiston D, Adams DS, Seebohm G, Trimmer B, et al. Modulation of potassium
channel function confers a hyperproliferative invasive phenotype on embryonic stem cells. Proc
Natl Acad Sci USA. 2008; 105:16608-16613. [PubMed: 18931301]
62. Pu J, Zhao M. Golgi polarization in a strong electric field. J Cell Sci. 2005; 118:1117–1128.
[PubMed: 15728257]
63. Harris AK, Pryer NK, Paydarfar D. Effects of electric fields on fibroblast contractility and
cytoskeleton. J Exp Zool. 1990; 253:163–176. [PubMed: 2313246]
64. Baumann M. Early stage shape change of human erythrocytes after application of electric field
pulses. Mol Membr Biol. 2001; 18:153–160. [PubMed: 11463207]
65. Root CM, Velázquez-Ulloa NA, Monsalve GC, Minakova E, Spitzer NC. Embryonically expressed
GABA and glutamate drive electrical activity regulating neurotransmitter specification. J
Neurosci. 2008; 28:4777–4784. [PubMed: 18448654]
66. Pineda RH, Svoboda KR, Wright MA, Taylor AD, Novak AE, et al. Knockdown of Nav1.6a Na+
channels affects zebrafish motoneuron development. Development. 2006; 133:3827-3836.
[PubMed: 16943272]
67. Svoboda KR, Linares AE, Ribera AB. Activity regulates programmed cell death of zebrafish
Rohon-Beard neurons. Development. 2001; 128:3511-3520. [PubMed: 11566856]
68. Messenger NJ, Warner AE. Primary neuronal differentiation in Xenopus embryos is linked to the
beta (3) subunit of the sodium pump. Dev Biol. 2000; 220:168–182. [PubMed: 10753508]
69. Ng SY, Chin CH, Lau YT, Luo J, Wong CK, et al. Role of voltage-gated potassium channels in the
fate determination of embryonic stem cells. J Cell Physiol. 2010; 224:165-177. [PubMed:
20333647]
70. van Vliet P, de Boer TP, van der Heyden MA, El Tamer MK, Sluijter JP, et al. Hyperpolarization
induces differentiation in human cardiomyocyte progenitor cells. Stem Cell Rev. 2010; 6:178-185.
[PubMed: 20354915]
71. Lange C, Prenninger S, Knuckles P, Taylor V, Levin M, et al. The H(+) vacuolar ATPase
maintains neural stem cells in the developing mouse cortex. Stem Cells Dev. 2011; 20:843-850.
[PubMed: 21126173]
72. Liu JH, Bijlenga P, Fischer-Lougheed J, Occhiodoro T, Kaelin A, et al. Role of an inward rectifier
K+ current and of hyperpolarization in human myoblast fusion. J Physiol. 1998; 510 :467–476.
[PubMed: 9705997]
73. Occhiodoro T, Bernheim L, Liu JH, Bijlenga P, Sinnreich M, et al. Cloning of a human ether-a-go-
go potassium channel expressed in myoblasts at the onset of fusion. FEBS Lett. 1998; 434:177–
182. [PubMed: 9738473]
74. Bijlenga P, Occhiodoro T, Liu JH, Bader CR, Bernheim L, et al. An ether -à-go-go K+ current, Ih-
eag, contributes to the hyperpolarization of human fusion-competent myoblasts. J Physiol. 1998;
512 :317-323. [PubMed: 9763622]
75. Hinard V, Belin D, Konig S, Bader CR, Bernheim L. Initiation of human myoblast differentiation
via dephosphorylation of Kir2.1 K+ channels at tyrosine 242. Development. 2008; 135:859–867.
[PubMed: 18216177]
76. Sundelacruz S, Levin M, Kaplan DL. Membrane potential controls adipogenic and osteogenic
differentiation of mesenchymal stem cells. PLoS One. 2008; 3:e3737. [PubMed: 19011685]
77. Jiang P, Rushing SN, Kong CW, Fu J, Lieu DK, et al. Electrophysiological Properties of Human
Induced Pluripotent Stem Cells. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol. 2009; 298:486-495.
78. Stillwell EF, Cone CM, Cone CD Jr. Stimulation of DNA synthesis in CNS neurones by sustained
depolarisation. Nat New Biol. 1973; 246:110–111. [PubMed: 4518935]
79. Cone CD Jr. Ionically mediated induction of mitogenesis in CNS neurons. Ann NY Acad Sci.
1980; 339:115-131. [PubMed: 6446869]
80. Levin M. Large-scale biophysics: ion flows and regeneration. Trends Cell Biol. 2007; 17:261-270.
[PubMed: 17498955]
81. Pullar CE, Isseroff RR. Cyclic AMP mediates keratinocyte directional migration in an electric
field. J Cell Sci. 2005; 118:2023-2034. [PubMed: 15840650]
82. Mycielska ME, Djamgoz MB. Cellular mechanisms of direct-current electric field effects:
galvanotaxis and metastatic disease. J Cell Sci. 2004; 117:1631–1639. [PubMed: 15075225]
83. Zhao M, Song B, Pu J, Wada T, Reid B, et al. Electrical signals control wound healing through
phosphatidylinositol-3-OH kinase-gamma and PTEN. Nature. 2006; 442:457-460. [PubMed:
16871217]
84. Rajnicek AM, Foubister LE, McCaig CD. Prioritising guidance cues: directional migration induced
by substratum contours and electrical gradients is controlled by a rho/cdc42 switch. Dev Biol.
2007; 312:448-460. [PubMed: 17976566]
85. Sáez JC, Connor JA, Spray DC, Bennett MV. Hepatocyte gap junctions are permeable to the
second messenger, inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate, and to calcium ions. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA.
1989; 86:2708-2712. [PubMed: 2784857]
86. Toyofuku T, Yabuki M, Otsu K, Kuzuya T, Hori M, et al. Intercellular calcium signaling via gap
junction in connexin-43-transfected cells. J Biol Chem. 1998; 273:1519–1528. [PubMed:
9430691]
87. Stains JP, Civitelli R. Gap junctions regulate extracellular signal-regulated kinase signaling to
affect gene transcription. Mol Biol Cell. 2005; 16:64–72. [PubMed: 15525679]
88. Palacios-Prado N, Bukauskas FF. Modulation of metabolic communication through gap junction
channels by transjunctional voltage; synergistic and antagonistic effects of gating and
ionophoresis. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2012; 1818:1884-1894. [PubMed: 21930112]
89. Levin M, Mercola M. Gap junctions are involved in the early generation of left-right asymmetry.
Dev Biol. 1998; 203:90–105. [PubMed: 9806775]
90. Levin M, Mercola M. Gap junction-mediated transfer of left-right patterning signals in the early
chick blastoderm is upstream of Shh asymmetry in the node. Development. 1999; 126:4703–4714.
[PubMed: 10518488]
91. Fukumoto T, Kema IP, Levin M. Serotonin signaling is a very early step in patterning of the left-
right axis in chick and frog embryos. Curr Biol. 2005; 15:794-803. [PubMed: 15886096]
92. Fukumoto T, Blakely R, Levin M. Serotonin transporter function is an early step in left-right
patterning in chick and frog embryos. Dev Neurosci. 2005; 27:349–363. [PubMed: 16280633]
93. Chernet BT, Levin M. Transmembrane voltage potential is an essential cellular parameter for the
detection and control of tumor development in a Xenopus model. Dis Model Mech. 2013; 6:595-
607. [PubMed: 23471912]
94. Tseng AS, Levin M. Transducing bioelectric signals into epigenetic pathways during tadpole tail
regeneration. Anat Rec (Hoboken). 2012; 295:1541–1551. [PubMed: 22933452]
95. Worby CA, Dixon JE. Phosphoinositide phosphatases: emerging roles as voltage sensors? Mol
Interv. 2005; 5:274-277. [PubMed: 16249522]
96. Murata Y, Iwasaki H, Sasaki M, Inaba K, Okamura Y. Phosphoinositide phosphatase activity
coupled to an intrinsic voltage sensor. Nature. 2005; 435:1239-1243. [PubMed: 15902207]
97. Okamura Y, Dixon JE. Voltage-sensing phosphatase: its molecular relationship with PTEN.
Physiology (Bethesda). 2011; 26:6-13. [PubMed: 21357898]
98. Lacroix J, Halaszovich CR, Schreiber DN, Leitner MG, Bezanilla F, et al. Controlling the activity
of a phosphatase and tensin homolog (PTEN) by membrane potential. J Biol Chem. 2011;
286:17945-17953. [PubMed: 21454672]
99. Carneiro K, Donnet C, Rejtar T, Karger BL, Barisone GA, et al. Histone deacetylase activity is
necessary for left-right patterning during vertebrate development. BMC Dev Biol. 2011; 11:29.
[PubMed: 21599922]
100. Adams DS, Levin M. Endogenous voltage gradients as mediators of cell-cell communication:
strategies for investigating bioelectrical signals during pattern formation. Cell Tissue Res. 2013;
352:95-122. [PubMed: 22350846]
101. Adams DS. A new tool for tissue engineers: ions as regulators of morphogenesis during
development and regeneration. Tissue Eng Part A. 2008; 14:1461–1468. [PubMed: 18601591]
102. Mutoh H, Perron A, Akemann W, Iwamoto Y, Knöpfel T. Optogenetic monitoring of membrane
potentials. Exp Physiol. 2011; 96:13–18. [PubMed: 20851856]
103. Hotary KB, Robinson KR. Evidence of a role for endogenous electrical fields in chick embryo
development. Development. 1992; 114:985–996. [PubMed: 1618158]
104. Shi R, Borgens RB. Three-dimensional gradients of voltage during development of the nervous
system as invisible coordinates for the establishment of embryonic pattern. Dev Dyn. 1995;
202:101-114. [PubMed: 7734729]
105. Levin M, Thorlin T, Robinson KR, Nogi T, Mercola M. Asymmetries in H+/K+-ATPase and cell
membrane potentials comprise a very early step in left-right patterning. Cell. 2002; 111:77–89.
[PubMed: 12372302]
106. Adams DS, Robinson KR, Fukumoto T, Yuan S, Albertson RC, et al. Early, H+-V-ATPase-
dependent proton flux is necessary for consistent left-right patterning of non-mammalian
vertebrates. Development. 2006; 133:1657–1671. [PubMed: 16554361]
107. Aw S, Adams DS, Qiu D, Levin M. H,K-ATPase protein localization and Kir4.1 function reveal
concordance of three axes during early determination of left-right asymmetry. Mech Dev. 2008;
125:353-372. [PubMed: 18160269]
108. Morokuma J, Blackiston D, Levin M. KCNQ1 and KCNE1 K+ channel components are involved
in early left-right patterning in Xenopus laevis embryos. Cell Physiol Biochem. 2008; 21:357-
372. [PubMed: 18453744]
109. Vandenberg LN, Lemire JM, Levin M. Serotonin has early, cilia-independent roles in Xenopus
left-right patterning. Dis Model Mech. 2013; 6:261–268. [PubMed: 22899856]
110. Pai VP, Aw S, Shomrat T, Lemire JM, Levin M. Transmembrane voltage potential controls
embryonic eye patterning in Xenopus laevis. Development. 2012; 139:313-323. [PubMed:
22159581]
111. Vandenberg LN, Morrie RD, Adams DS. V-ATPase-dependent ectodermal voltage and pH
regionalization are required for craniofacial morphogenesis. Dev Dyn. 2011; 240:1889–1904.
[PubMed: 21761475]
112. Nogi T, Levin M. Characterization of innexin gene expression and functional roles of gap-
junctional communication in planarian regeneration. Dev Biol. 2005; 287:314-335. [PubMed:
16243308]
113. Beane WS, Morokuma J, Adams DS, Levin M. A chemical genetics approach reveals H,K-
ATPase-mediated membrane voltage is required for planarian head regeneration. Chem Biol.
2011; 18:77-89. [PubMed: 21276941]
114. Oviedo NJ, Morokuma J, Walentek P, Kema IP, Gu MB, et al. Long-range neural and gap
junction protein-mediated cues control polarity during planarian regeneration. Dev Biol. 2010;
339:188-199. [PubMed: 20026026]
115. Beane WS, Morokuma J, Lemire JM, Levin M. Bioelectric signaling regulates head and organ
size during planarian regeneration. Development. 2013; 140:313-322. [PubMed: 23250205]
116. Bodemer CW. Evocation Of Regrowth Phenomena In Anuran Limbs By Electrical Stimulation
Of The Nerve Supply. Anat Rec. 1964; 148:441-457. [PubMed: 14153304]
117. Becker RO. The bioelectric factors in amphibian-limb regeneration. J Bone Joint Surg Am. 1961;
43-43A:643-56.
118. Becker RO, Spadaro JA. Electrical stimulation of partial limb regeneration in mammals. Bull N Y
Acad Med. 1972; 48:627-641. [PubMed: 4503923]
119. Borgens RB. Are limb development and limb regeneration both initiated by an integumentary
wounding? A hypothesis. Differentiation. 1984; 28:87–93. [PubMed: 6526168]
120. Borgens RB, Rouleau MF, DeLanney LE. A steady efflux of ionic current predicts hind limb
development in the axolotl. J Exp Zool. 1983; 228:491–503. [PubMed: 6663262]
121. Borgens RB, Vanable JW Jr, Jaffe LF. Reduction of sodium dependent stump currents disturbs
urodele limb regeneration. J Exp Zool. 1979; 209:377-386. [PubMed: 490133]
122. Borgens RB, Vanable JW Jr, Jaffe LF. Bioelectricity and regeneration: large currents leave the
stumps of regenerating newt limbs. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 1977; 74:4528–4532. [PubMed:
270701]
123. Borgens RB, Vanable JW Jr, Jaffe LF. Bioelectricity and regeneration. I. Initiation of frog limb
regeneration by minute currents. J Exp Zool. 1977; 200:403–416. [PubMed: 301554]
124. Adams DS, Masi A, Levin M. H+ pump-dependent changes in membrane voltage are an early
mechanism necessary and sufficient to induce Xenopus tail regeneration. Development. 2007;
134:1323-1335. [PubMed: 17329365]
125. Tseng AS, Beane WS, Lemire JM, Masi A, Levin M. Induction of vertebrate regeneration by a
transient sodium current. J Neurosci. 2010; 30:13192-13200. [PubMed: 20881138]
126. Tseng A, Levin M. Cracking the bioelectric code: Probing endogenous ionic controls of pattern
formation. Commun Integr Biol. 2013; 6:e22595. [PubMed: 23802040]
127. Rock JR, Futtner CR, Harfe BD. The transmembrane protein TMEM16A is required for normal
development of the murine trachea. Dev Biol. 2008; 321:141–149. [PubMed: 18585372]
128. Iwashita M, Watanabe M, Ishii M, Chen T, Johnson SL, et al. Pigment pattern in jaguar/obelix
zebrafish is caused by a Kir7.1 mutation: implications for the regulation of melanosome
movement. PLoS Genet. 2006; 2:e197. [PubMed: 17121467]
129. Watanabe M, Iwashita M, Ishii M, Kurachi Y, Kawakami A, et al. Spot pattern of leopard Danio
is caused by mutation in the zebrafish connexin41.8 gene. EMBO Rep. 2006; 7:893–897.
[PubMed: 16845369]
130. Hoptak-Solga AD, Nielsen S, Jain I, Thummel R, Hyde DR, et al. Connexin43 (GJA1) is required
in the population of dividing cells during fin regeneration. Dev Biol. 2008; 317:541-548.
[PubMed: 18406403]
131. Gloyn AL, Pearson ER, Antcliff JF, Proks P, Bruining GJ, et al. Activating mutations in the gene
encoding the ATP-sensitive potassium-channel subunit Kir6.2 and permanent neonatal diabetes.
N Engl J Med. 2004; 350:1838-1849. [PubMed: 15115830]
132. Culiat CT, Stubbs LJ, Woychik RP, Russell LB, Johnson DK, et al. Deficiency of the beta 3
subunit of the type A gamma-aminobutyric acid receptor causes cleft palate in mice. Nat Genet.
1995; 11:344-346. [PubMed: 7581464]
133. Wee EL, Zimmerman EF. GABA uptake in embryonic palate mesenchymal cells of two mouse
strains. Neurochem Res. 1985; 10:1673-1688. [PubMed: 4088436]
134. Miller RP, Becker BA. Teratogenicity of oral diazepam and diphenylhydantoin in mice. Toxicol
Appl Pharmacol. 1975; 32:53–61. [PubMed: 1135879]
135. Homanics GE, DeLorey TM, Firestone LL, Quinlan JJ, Handforth A, et al. Mice devoid of
gamma-aminobutyrate type A receptor beta3 subunit have epilepsy, cleft palate, and
hypersensitive behavior. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 1997; 94:4143–4148. [PubMed: 9108119]
136. Bendahhou S, Donaldson MR, Plaster NM, Tristani-Firouzi M, Fu YH, et al. Defective potassium
channel Kir2.1 trafficking underlies Andersen-Tawil syndrome. J Biol Chem. 2003; 278:51779–
51785. [PubMed: 14522976]
137. Dahal GR, Rawson J, Gassaway B, Kwok B, Tong Y, et al. An inwardly rectifying K+ channel is
required for patterning. Development. 2012; 139:3653–3664. [PubMed: 22949619]
138. Debeer P, Van Esch H, Huysmans C, Pijkels E, De Smet L, et al. Novel GJA1 mutations in
patients with oculo-dento-digital dysplasia (ODDD). Eur J Med Genet. 2005; 48:377-387.
[PubMed: 16378922]
139. Pizzuti A, Flex E, Mingarelli R, Salpietro C, Zelante L, et al. A homozygous GJA1 gene mutation
causes a Hallermann-Streiff/ODDD spectrum phenotype. Hum Mutat. 2004; 23:286. [PubMed:
14974090]
140. Rakic P, Sidman RL. Sequence of developmental abnormalities leading to granule cell deficit in
cerebellar cortex of weaver mutant mice. J Comp Neurol. 1973; 152:103–132. [PubMed:
4128371]
141. Rakic P, Sidman RL. Weaver mutant mouse cerebellum: defective neuronal migration secondary
to abnormality of Bergmann glia. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 1973; 70:240-244. [PubMed:
4509657]
142. Hatten ME, Liem RK, Mason CA. Weaver mouse cerebellar granule neurons fail to migrate on
wild-type astroglial processes in vitro. J Neurosci. 1986; 6:2676-2683. [PubMed: 3528411]
143. Patil N, Cox DR, Bhat D, Faham M, Myers RM, et al. A potassium channel mutation in weaver
mice implicates membrane excitability in granule cell differentiation. Nat Genet. 1995; 11:126-
129. [PubMed: 7550338]
144. Civitelli R. Cell-cell communication in the osteoblast/osteocyte lineage. Arch Biochem Biophys.
2008; 473:188-192. [PubMed: 18424255]
145. Chopra SS, Stroud DM, Watanabe H, Bennett JS, Burns CG, et al. Voltage-gated sodium
channels are required for heart development in zebrafish. Circ Res. 2010; 106:1342-1350.
[PubMed: 20339120]
146. Teng GQ, Zhao X, Lees-Miller JP, Quinn FR, Li P, et al. Homozygous missense N629D hERG
(KCNH2) potassium channel mutation causes developmental defects in the right ventricle and its
outflow tract and embryonic lethality. Circ Res. 2008; 103:1483–1491. [PubMed: 18948620]
147. Uzun S, Gokce S, Wagner K. Cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator gene
mutations in infertile males with congenital bilateral absence of the vas deferens. The Tohoku
journal of experimental medicine. 2005; 207:279–285. [PubMed: 16272798]
148. Wilschanski M, Dupuis A, Ellis L, Jarvi K, Zielenski J, et al. Mutations in the cystic fibrosis
transmembrane regulator gene and in vivo transepithelial potentials. Am J Respir Crit Care Med.
2006; 174:787-794. [PubMed: 16840743]
149. Riss J, Khanna C, Koo S, Chandramouli GV, Yang HH, et al. Cancers as wounds that do not heal:
differences and similarities between renal regeneration/repair and renal cell carcinoma. Cancer
Res. 2006; 66:7216-7224. [PubMed: 16849569]
150. Kenny PA, Nelson CM, Bissell MJ. The Ecology of Tumors: By perturbing the
microenvironment, wounds and infection may be key to tumor development. Scientist. 2006;
20:30. [PubMed: 21132085]
151. Dolberg DS, Hollingsworth R, Hertle M, Bissell MJ. Wounding and its role in RSV-mediated
tumor formation. Science. 1985; 230:676-678. [PubMed: 2996144]
152. Pullar CE, Baier BS, Kariya Y, Russell AJ, Horst BA, et al. beta4 integrin and epidermal growth
factor coordinately regulate electric field-mediated directional migration via Rac1. Mol Biol Cell.
2006; 17:4925-4935. [PubMed: 16914518]
153. Huber SM. Oncochannels. Cell Calcium. 2013; 53:241-255. [PubMed: 23357407]
154. Arcangeli A. Ion channels and transporters in cancer. 3. Ion channels in the tumor cell-
microenvironment cross talk. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol. 2011; 301:C762–771. [PubMed:
21562309]

135. Homanics GE, DeLorey TM, Firestone LL, Quinlan JJ, Handforth A, et al. Mice devoid of
gamma-aminobutyrate type A receptor beta3 subunit have epilepsy, cleft palate, and
hypersensitive behavior. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 1997; 94:4143–4148. [PubMed: 9108119]
136. Bendahhou S, Donaldson MR, Plaster NM, Tristani-Firouzi M, Fu YH, et al. Defective potassium
channel Kir2.1 trafficking underlies Andersen-Tawil syndrome. J Biol Chem. 2003; 278:51779–
51785. [PubMed: 14522976]
137. Dahal GR, Rawson J, Gassaway B, Kwok B, Tong Y, et al. An inwardly rectifying K+ channel is
required for patterning. Development. 2012; 139:3653–3664. [PubMed: 22949619]
138. Debeer P, Van Esch H, Huysmans C, Pijkels E, De Smet L, et al. Novel GJA1 mutations in
patients with oculo-dento-digital dysplasia (ODDD). Eur J Med Genet. 2005; 48:377-387.
[PubMed: 16378922]
139. Pizzuti A, Flex E, Mingarelli R, Salpietro C, Zelante L, et al. A homozygous GJA1 gene mutation
causes a Hallermann-Streiff/ODDD spectrum phenotype. Hum Mutat. 2004; 23:286. [PubMed:
14974090]
140. Rakic P, Sidman RL. Sequence of developmental abnormalities leading to granule cell deficit in
cerebellar cortex of weaver mutant mice. J Comp Neurol. 1973; 152:103–132. [PubMed:
4128371]
141. Rakic P, Sidman RL. Weaver mutant mouse cerebellum: defective neuronal migration secondary
to abnormality of Bergmann glia. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 1973; 70:240-244. [PubMed:
4509657]
142. Hatten ME, Liem RK, Mason CA. Weaver mouse cerebellar granule neurons fail to migrate on
wild-type astroglial processes in vitro. J Neurosci. 1986; 6:2676-2683. [PubMed: 3528411]
143. Patil N, Cox DR, Bhat D, Faham M, Myers RM, et al. A potassium channel mutation in weaver
mice implicates membrane excitability in granule cell differentiation. Nat Genet. 1995; 11:126-
129. [PubMed: 7550338]
144. Civitelli R. Cell-cell communication in the osteoblast/osteocyte lineage. Arch Biochem Biophys.
2008; 473:188-192. [PubMed: 18424255]
145. Chopra SS, Stroud DM, Watanabe H, Bennett JS, Burns CG, et al. Voltage-gated sodium
channels are required for heart development in zebrafish. Circ Res. 2010; 106:1342-1350.
[PubMed: 20339120]
146. Teng GQ, Zhao X, Lees-Miller JP, Quinn FR, Li P, et al. Homozygous missense N629D hERG
(KCNH2) potassium channel mutation causes developmental defects in the right ventricle and its
outflow tract and embryonic lethality. Circ Res. 2008; 103:1483–1491. [PubMed: 18948620]
147. Uzun S, Gokce S, Wagner K. Cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator gene
mutations in infertile males with congenital bilateral absence of the vas deferens. The Tohoku
journal of experimental medicine. 2005; 207:279–285. [PubMed: 16272798]
148. Wilschanski M, Dupuis A, Ellis L, Jarvi K, Zielenski J, et al. Mutations in the cystic fibrosis
transmembrane regulator gene and in vivo transepithelial potentials. Am J Respir Crit Care Med.
2006; 174:787-794. [PubMed: 16840743]
149. Riss J, Khanna C, Koo S, Chandramouli GV, Yang HH, et al. Cancers as wounds that do not heal:
differences and similarities between renal regeneration/repair and renal cell carcinoma. Cancer
Res. 2006; 66:7216-7224. [PubMed: 16849569]
150. Kenny PA, Nelson CM, Bissell MJ. The Ecology of Tumors: By perturbing the
microenvironment, wounds and infection may be key to tumor development. Scientist. 2006;
20:30. [PubMed: 21132085]
151. Dolberg DS, Hollingsworth R, Hertle M, Bissell MJ. Wounding and its role in RSV-mediated
tumor formation. Science. 1985; 230:676-678. [PubMed: 2996144]
152. Pullar CE, Baier BS, Kariya Y, Russell AJ, Horst BA, et al. beta4 integrin and epidermal growth
factor coordinately regulate electric field-mediated directional migration via Rac1. Mol Biol Cell.
2006; 17:4925-4935. [PubMed: 16914518]
153. Huber SM. Oncochannels. Cell Calcium. 2013; 53:241-255. [PubMed: 23357407]
154. Arcangeli A. Ion channels and transporters in cancer. 3. Ion channels in the tumor cell-
microenvironment cross talk. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol. 2011; 301:C762–771. [PubMed:
21562309]
155. Arcangeli A, Crociani O, Lastraioli E, Masi A, Pillozzi S, et al. Targeting ion channels in cancer:
a novel frontier in antineoplastic therapy. Curr Med Chem. 2009; 16:66–93. [PubMed:
19149563]
156. Farias LM, Ocaña DB, Díaz L, Larrea F, Avila-Chávez E, et al. Ether a go-go potassium channels
as human cervical cancer markers. Cancer Res. 2004; 64:6996-7001. [PubMed: 15466192]
157. Killion JJ. Electrical properties of normal and transformed mammalian cells. Biophys J. 1984;
45:523-528. [PubMed: 6324916]
158. Martínez-Zaguilán R, Gillies RJ. A plasma membrane V-type H(+)-ATPase may contribute to
elevated intracellular pH (pHin) in some human tumor cells. Ann NY Acad Sci. 1992; 671:478-
480. [PubMed: 1288345]
159. Martinez-Zaguilan R, Lynch RM, Martinez GM, Gillies RJ. Vacuolar-type H(+)-ATPases are
functionally expressed in plasma membranes of human tumor cells. Am J Physiol. 1993;
265:C1015-1029. [PubMed: 8238296]
160. Bianchi L, Wible B, Arcangeli A, Taglialatela M, Morra F, et al. herg encodes a K+ current
highly conserved in tumors of different histogenesis: a selective advantage for cancer cells?
Cancer Res. 1998; 58:815-822. [PubMed: 9485040]
161. Arcangeli A, Bianchi L, Becchetti A, Faravelli L, Coronnello M, et al. A novel inward-rectifying
K+ current with a cell-cycle dependence governs the resting potential of mammalian
neuroblastoma cells. J Physiol. 1995; 489 :455-471. [PubMed: 8847640]
162. McLean LA, Roscoe J, Jorgensen NK, Gorin FA, Cala PM. Malignant gliomas display altered pH
regulation by NHE1 compared with nontransformed astrocytes. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol. 2000;
278:C676-688. [PubMed: 10751317]
163. Wissenbach U, Niemeyer BA, Fixemer T, Schneidewind A, Trost C, et al. Expression of CaT-
like, a novel calcium-selective channel, correlates with the malignancy of prostate cancer. J Biol
Chem. 2001; 276:19461–19468. [PubMed: 11278579]
164. Wissenbach U, Niemeyer B, Himmerkus N, Fixemer T, Bonkhoff H, et al. TRPV6 and prostate
cancer: cancer growth beyond the prostate correlates with increased TRPV6 Ca2+ channel
expression. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2004; 322:1359–1363. [PubMed: 15336984]
165. Marino AA, Iliev IG, Schwalke MA, Gonzalez E, Marler KC, et al. Association between cell
membrane potential and breast cancer. Tumour Biol. 1994; 15:82-89. [PubMed: 8184256]
166. Voloshyna I, Besana A, Castillo M, Matos T, Weinstein IB, et al. TREK-1 is a novel molecular
target in prostate cancer. Cancer Res. 2008; 68:1197–1203. [PubMed: 18281496]
167. Diss JK, Stewart D, Pani F, Foster CS, Walker MM, et al. A potential novel marker for human
prostate cancer: voltage-gated sodium channel expression in vivo. Prostate Cancer Prostatic Dis.
2005; 8:266-273. [PubMed: 16088330]
168. Duncan LM, Deeds J, Cronin FE, Donovan M, Sober AJ, et al. Melastatin expression and
prognosis in cutaneous malignant melanoma. J Clin Oncol. 2001; 19:568–576. [PubMed:
11208852]
169. Zhiqi S, Soltani MH, Bhat KM, Sangha N, Fang D, et al. Human melastatin 1 (TRPM1) is
regulated by MITF and produces multiple polypeptide isoforms in melanocytes and melanoma.
Melanoma Res. 2004; 14:509-516. [PubMed: 15577322]
170. Xu J, Xie R, Liu X, Wen G, Jin H, et al. Expression and functional role of vacuolar H(+)-ATPase
in human hepatocellular carcinoma. Carcinogenesis. 2012; 33:2432-2440. [PubMed: 22962303]
171. Conti M. Targeting K+ channels for cancer therapy. J Exp Ther Oncol. 2004; 4:161–166.
[PubMed: 15500011]
172. Fraser SP, Grimes JA, Djamgoz MB. Effects of voltage-gated ion channel modulators on rat
prostatic cancer cell proliferation: comparison of strongly and weakly metastatic cell lines.
Prostate. 2000; 44:61–76. [PubMed: 10861759]
173. Schlichter LC, Sakellaropoulos G, Ballyk B, Pennefather PS, Phipps DJ. Properties of K+ and Cl
channels and their involvement in proliferation of rat microglial cells. Glia. 1996; 17:225-236.
[PubMed: 8840164]
174. Schuldiner S, Rozengurt E. Na+/H+ antiport in Swiss 3T3 cells: mitogenic stimulation leads to
cytoplasmic alkalinization. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 1982; 79:7778–7782. [PubMed: 6961450]
175. Lopez-Rivas A, Adelberg EA, Rozengurt E. Intracellular K+ and the mitogenic response of 3T3
cells to peptide factors in serum-free medium. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 1982; 79:6275–6279.
[PubMed: 6755467]
176. Burns CP, Rozengurt E. Extracellular Na+ and initiation of DNA synthesis: role of intracellular
pH and K+ J Cell Biol. 1984; 98:1082–1089. [PubMed: 6699083]
177. Pillozzi S, Brizzi MF, Balzi M, Crociani O, Cherubini A, et al. HERG potassium channels are
constitutively expressed in primary human acute myeloid leukemias and regulate cell
proliferation of normal and leukemic hemopoietic progenitors. Leukemia. 2002; 16:1791–1798.
[PubMed: 12200695]
178. Wohlrab D, Wohlrab J, Markwardt F. Electrophysiological characterization of human
keratinocytes using the patch-clamp technique. Exp Dermatol. 2000; 9:219–223. [PubMed:
10839720]
179. Dalle-Lucca SL, Dalle-Lucca JJ, Borges AC, Ihara SS, Paiva TB. Abnormal proliferative
response of the carotid artery of spontaneously hypertensive rats after angioplasty may be related
to the depolarized state of its smooth muscle cells. Braz J Med Biol Res. 2000; 33:919–927.
[PubMed: 10920434]
180. Wohlrab D, Hein W. Effect of ion channel modulators on the membrane potential of human
chondrocytes. Orthopade. 2000; 29:80–84. [PubMed: 10743627]
181. MacFarlane SN, Sontheimer H. Changes in ion channel expression accompany cell cycle
progression of spinal cord astrocytes. Glia. 2000; 30:39–48. [PubMed: 10696143]
182. Kamleiter M, Hanemann CO, Kluwe L, Rosenbaum C, Wosch S, et al. Voltage-dependent
membrane currents of cultured human neurofibromatosis type 2 Schwann cells. Glia. 1998;
24:313-322. [PubMed: 9775982]
183. Wang S, Melkoumian Z, Woodfork KA, Cather C, Davidson AG, et al. Evidence for an early G1
ionic event necessary for cell cycle progression and survival in the MCF-7 human breast
carcinoma cell line. J Cell Physiol. 1998; 176:456-464. [PubMed: 9699498]
184. Knutson P, Ghiani CA, Zhou JM, Gallo V, McBain CJ. K+ channel expression and cell
proliferation are regulated by intracellular sodium and membrane depolarization in
oligodendrocyte progenitor cells. J Neurosci. 1997; 17:2669–2682. [PubMed: 9092588]
185. Puro DG, Roberge F, Chan CC. Retinal glial cell proliferation and ion channels: a possible link.
Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 1989; 30:521–529. [PubMed: 2466809]
186. Banderali U, Belke D, Singh A, Jayanthan A, Giles WR, et al. Curcumin blocks Kv11.1 (erg)
potassium current and slows proliferation in the infant acute monocytic leukemia cell line THP-1.
Cell Physiol Biochem. 2011; 28:1169–1180. [PubMed: 22179005]
187. Lin H, Xiao J, Luo X, Wang H, Gao H, et al. Overexpression HERG K(+) channel gene mediates
cell-growth signals on activation of oncoproteins SP1 and NF-kappaB and inactivation of tumor
suppressor Nkx3.1. J Cell Physiol. 2007; 1:137-47. [PubMed: 17311278]
188. Wang H, Zhang Y, Cao L, Han H, Wang J, et al. HERG K+ channel, a regulator of tumor cell
apoptosis and proliferation. Cancer Res. 2002; 62:4843-4848. [PubMed: 12208728]
189. Lastraioli E, Guasti L, Crociani O, Polvani S, Hofmann G, et al. herg1 gene and HERG1 protein
are overexpressed in colorectal cancers and regulate cell invasion of tumor cells. Cancer Res.
2004; 64:606-611. [PubMed: 14744775]
190. Wang Z. Roles of K+ channels in regulating tumour cell proliferation and apoptosis. Pflugers
Arch. 2004; 448:274-286. [PubMed: 15048575]
191. Arcangeli A. Expression and role of hERG channels in cancer cells. Novartis Found Symp. 2005;
266:225-232. [PubMed: 16050271]
192. Klezovitch O, Risk M, Coleman I, Lucas JM, Null M, et al. A causal role for ERG in neoplastic
transformation of prostate epithelium. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2008; 105:2105-2110.
[PubMed: 18245377]
193. Mu D, Chen L, Zhang X, See LH, Koch CM, et al. Genomic amplification and oncogenic
properties of the KCNK9 potassium channel gene. Cancer Cell. 2003; 3:297–302. [PubMed:
12676587]
194. Pei L, Wiser O, Slavin A, Mu D, Powers S, et al. Oncogenic potential of TASK3 (Kcnk9)
depends on K+ channel function. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2003; 100:7803–7807. [PubMed:
12782791]
195. Bennett ES, Smith BA, Harper JM. Voltage-gated Na+ channels confer invasive properties on
human prostate cancer cells. Pflugers Arch. 2004; 447:908–914. [PubMed: 14677067]
196. Pardo LA, del Camino D, Sánchez A, Alves F, Brüggemann A, et al. Oncogenic potential of EAG
K(+) channels. EMBO J. 1999; 18:5540–5547. [PubMed: 10523298]
197. Lin H, Li Z, Chen C, Luo X, Xiao J, et al. Transcriptional and post-transcriptional mechanisms
for oncogenic overexpression of ether à go-go K+ channel. PLoS One. 2011; 6:e20362.
[PubMed: 21655246]
198. Klimatcheva E, Wonderlin WF. An ATP-sensitive K(+) current that regulates progression
through early G1 phase of the cell cycle in MCF-7 human breast cancer cells. J Membr Biol.
1999; 171:35-46. [PubMed: 10485992]
199. Strobl JS, Wonderlin WF, Flynn DC. Mitogenic signal transduction in human breast cancer cells.
Gen Pharmacol. 1995; 26:1643-1649. [PubMed: 8745151]
200. Brackenbury WJ, Djamgoz MB. Activity-dependent regulation of voltage-gated Na+ channel
expression in Mat-LyLu rat prostate cancer cell line. J Physiol. 2006; 573:343-356. [PubMed:
16543264]
201. Onganer PU, Seckl MJ, Djamgoz MB. Neuronal characteristics of small-cell lung cancer. Br J
Cancer. 2005; 93:1197–1201. [PubMed: 16265346]
202. Onganer PU, Djamgoz MB. Small-cell lung cancer (human): potentiation of endocytic membrane
activity by voltage-gated Na(+) channel expression in vitro. J Membr Biol. 2005; 204:67–75.
[PubMed: 16151702]
203. Fraser SP, Diss JK, Chioni AM, Mycielska ME, Pan H, et al. Voltage-gated sodium channel
expression and potentiation of human breast cancer metastasis. Clin Cancer Res. 2005; 11:5381-
5389. [PubMed: 16061851]
204. Liu LY, Hu CL, Ma LJ, Zhang ZH, Mei YA. ET-1 inhibits B-16 murine melanoma cell migration
by decreasing K(+) currents. Cell Motil Cytoskeleton. 2004; 58:127-136. [PubMed: 15083534]
205. Fraser SP, Ozerlat-Gunduz I, Onkal R, Diss JK, Latchman DS, et al. Estrogen and non-genomic
upregulation of voltage-gated Na(+) channel activity in MDA-MB-231 human breast cancer
cells: role in adhesion. J Cell Physiol. 2010; 224:527-539. [PubMed: 20432453]
206. Onkal R, Mattis JH, Fraser SP, Diss JK, Shao D, et al. Alternative splicing of Nav1.5: an
electrophysiological comparison of 'neonatal' and 'adult' isoforms and critical involvement of a
lysine residue. J Cell Physiol. 2008; 216:716-726. [PubMed: 18393272]
207. Diss JK, Fraser SP, Walker MM, Patel A, Latchman DS, et al. Beta-subunits of voltage-gated
sodium channels in human prostate cancer: quantitative in vitro and in vivo analyses of mRNA
expression. Prostate Cancer Prostatic Dis. 2008; 11:325–333. [PubMed: 17893701]
208. Ding Y, Brackenbury WJ, Onganer PU, Montano X, Porter LM, et al. Epidermal growth factor
upregulates motility of Mat-LyLu rat prostate cancer cells partially via voltage-gated Na+
channel activity. J Cell Physiol. 2008; 215:77–81. [PubMed: 17960590]
209. Brackenbury WJ, Djamgoz MB, Isom LL. An emerging role for voltage-gated Na+ channels in
cellular migration: regulation of central nervous system development and potentiation of invasive
cancers. Neuroscientist. 2008; 14:571-583. [PubMed: 18940784]
210. Uysal-Onganer P, Djamgoz MB. Epidermal growth factor potentiates in vitro metastatic
behaviour of human prostate cancer PC-3M cells: involvement of voltage-gated sodium channel.
Mol Cancer. 2007; 6:76. [PubMed: 18036246]
211. Brackenbury WJ, Djamgoz MB. Nerve growth factor enhances voltage-gated Na+ channel
activity and Transwell migration in Mat-LyLu rat prostate cancer cell line. J Cell Physiol. 2007;
210:602-608. [PubMed: 17149708]
212. Takamori M. An autoimmune channelopathy associated with cancer: Lambert-Eaton myasthenic
syndrome. Intern Med. 1999; 38:86-96. [PubMed: 10225662]
213. Weksberg R, Shuman C, Caluseriu O, Smith AC, Fei YL, et al. Discordant KCNQ1OT1
imprinting in sets of monozygotic twins discordant for Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome. Hum
Mol Genet. 2002; 11:1317–1325. [PubMed: 12019213]
214. Weksberg R, Nishikawa J, Caluseriu O, Fei YL, Shuman C, et al. Tumor development in the
Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome is associated with a variety of constitutional molecular 11p15
alterations including imprinting defects of KCNQ1OT1. Hum Mol Genet. 2001; 10:2989–3000.
[PubMed: 11751681]
215. Lee MP, Hu RJ, Johnson LA, Feinberg AP. Human KVLQT1 gene shows tissue-specific
imprinting and encompasses Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome chromosomal rearrangements. Nat
Genet. 1997; 15:181-185. [PubMed: 9020845]
216. Feldman JD, Vician L, Crispino M, Tocco G, Marcheselli VL, et al. KID-1, a protein kinase
induced by depolarization in brain. J Biol Chem. 1998; 273:16535–16543. [PubMed: 9632723]
217. Liu W, Feldman JD, Machado HB, Vician LJ, Herschman HR. Expression of depolarization-
induced immediate early gene proteins in PC12 cells. J Neurosci Res. 2003; 72:670–678.
[PubMed: 12774307]
218. Saris CJ, Domen J, Berns A. The pim-1 oncogene encodes two related protein-serine/threonine
kinases by alternative initiation at AUG and CUG. EMBO J. 1991; 10:655–664. [PubMed:
1825810]
219. Arcangeli A, Becchetti A, Mannini A, Mugnai G, De Filippi P, et al. Integrin-mediated neurite
outgrowth in neuroblastoma cells depends on the activation of potassium channels. J Cell Biol.
1993; 122:1131-1143. [PubMed: 8354696]
220. Hofmann G, Bernabei PA, Crociani O, Cherubini A, Guasti L, et al. HERG K+ channels
activation during beta(1) integrin-mediated adhesion to fibronectin induces an up-regulation of
alpha(v)beta(3) integrin in the preosteoclastic leukemia cell line FLG 29.1. J Biol Chem. 2001;
276:4923-4931. [PubMed: 11080495]
221. McSheehy PM, Troy H, Kelland LR, Judson IR, Leach MO, et al. Increased tumour extracellular
pH induced by Bafilomycin A1 inhibits tumour growth and mitosis in vivo and alters 5-
fluorouracil pharmacokinetics. Eur J Cancer. 2003; 39:532-540. [PubMed: 12751386]
222. Ohta T, Arakawa H, Futagami F, Fushida S, Kitagawa H, et al. Bafilomycin Al induces apoptosis
in the human pancreatic cancer cell line Capan-1. J Pathol. 1998; 185:324-330. [PubMed:
9771488]
223. Yamamoto A, Tagawa Y, Yoshimori T, Moriyama Y, Masaki R, et al. Bafilomycin Al prevents
maturation of autophagic vacuoles by inhibiting fusion between autophagosomes and lysosomes
in rat hepatoma cell line, H-4-II-E cells. Cell Struct Funct. 1998; 23:33–42. [PubMed: 9639028]
224. Rhodes T, Barrand MA, Twentyman PR. Modification by brefeldin A, bafilomycin Al and 7-
chloro-4-nitrobenz-2-oxa-1,3-diazole (NBD) of cellular accumulation and intracellular
distribution of anthracyclines in the non-P-glycoprotein-mediated multidrug-resistant cell line
COR-L23/R. Br J Cancer. 1994; 70:60–66. [PubMed: 7912544]
225. Prasad PD, Mahesh VB, Leibach FH, Ganapathy V. Functional coupling between a bafilomycin
Al-sensitive proton pump and a probenecid-sensitive folate transporter in human placental
choriocarcinoma cells. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1994; 1222:309–314. [PubMed: 8031869]
226. Kinoshita K, Hidaka H, Ohkuma S. Induction of phagocytic activity of M1 cells by an inhibitor of
vacuolar H+-ATPase, bafilomycin A1. FEBS Lett. 1994; 337:221–225. [PubMed: 7507442]
227. Henomatsu N, Yoshimori T, Yamamoto A, Moriyama Y, Tashiro Y. Inhibition of intracellular
transport of newly synthesized prolactin by bafilomycin Al in a pituitary tumor cell line, GH3
cells. Eur J Cell Biol. 1993; 62:127-139. [PubMed: 8269970]
228. Heinle S, Stünkel K, Zähner H, Drautz H, Bessler WG. Immunosuppressive effects of the
macrolide antibiotic bafilomycin towards lymphocytes and lymphoid cell lines.
Arzneimittelforschung. 1988; 38:1130–1133. [PubMed: 3264168]
229. Jäger H, Dreker T, Buck A, Giehl K, Gress T, et al. Blockage of intermediate-conductance Ca2+ -
activated K+ channels inhibit human pancreatic cancer cell growth in vitro. Mol Pharmacol.
2004; 65:630-638. [PubMed: 14978241]
230. Schuller HM, Al-Wadei HA. Neurotransmitter receptors as central regulators of pancreatic
cancer. Future Oncol. 2010; 6:221-228. [PubMed: 20146581]
231. Entschladen F, Lang K, Drell TL, Joseph J, Zaenker KS. Neurotransmitters are regulators for the
migration of tumor cells and leukocytes. Cancer Immunol Immunother. 2002; 51:467-482.
[PubMed: 12357318]

214. Weksberg R, Nishikawa J, Caluseriu O, Fei YL, Shuman C, et al. Tumor development in the
Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome is associated with a variety of constitutional molecular 11p15
alterations including imprinting defects of KCNQ1OT1. Hum Mol Genet. 2001; 10:2989–3000.
[PubMed: 11751681]
215. Lee MP, Hu RJ, Johnson LA, Feinberg AP. Human KVLQT1 gene shows tissue-specific
imprinting and encompasses Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome chromosomal rearrangements. Nat
Genet. 1997; 15:181-185. [PubMed: 9020845]
216. Feldman JD, Vician L, Crispino M, Tocco G, Marcheselli VL, et al. KID-1, a protein kinase
induced by depolarization in brain. J Biol Chem. 1998; 273:16535–16543. [PubMed: 9632723]
217. Liu W, Feldman JD, Machado HB, Vician LJ, Herschman HR. Expression of depolarization-
induced immediate early gene proteins in PC12 cells. J Neurosci Res. 2003; 72:670–678.
[PubMed: 12774307]
218. Saris CJ, Domen J, Berns A. The pim-1 oncogene encodes two related protein-serine/threonine
kinases by alternative initiation at AUG and CUG. EMBO J. 1991; 10:655–664. [PubMed:
1825810]
219. Arcangeli A, Becchetti A, Mannini A, Mugnai G, De Filippi P, et al. Integrin-mediated neurite
outgrowth in neuroblastoma cells depends on the activation of potassium channels. J Cell Biol.
1993; 122:1131-1143. [PubMed: 8354696]
220. Hofmann G, Bernabei PA, Crociani O, Cherubini A, Guasti L, et al. HERG K+ channels
activation during beta(1) integrin-mediated adhesion to fibronectin induces an up-regulation of
alpha(v)beta(3) integrin in the preosteoclastic leukemia cell line FLG 29.1. J Biol Chem. 2001;
276:4923-4931. [PubMed: 11080495]
221. McSheehy PM, Troy H, Kelland LR, Judson IR, Leach MO, et al. Increased tumour extracellular
pH induced by Bafilomycin A1 inhibits tumour growth and mitosis in vivo and alters 5-
fluorouracil pharmacokinetics. Eur J Cancer. 2003; 39:532-540. [PubMed: 12751386]
222. Ohta T, Arakawa H, Futagami F, Fushida S, Kitagawa H, et al. Bafilomycin Al induces apoptosis
in the human pancreatic cancer cell line Capan-1. J Pathol. 1998; 185:324-330. [PubMed:
9771488]
223. Yamamoto A, Tagawa Y, Yoshimori T, Moriyama Y, Masaki R, et al. Bafilomycin Al prevents
maturation of autophagic vacuoles by inhibiting fusion between autophagosomes and lysosomes
in rat hepatoma cell line, H-4-II-E cells. Cell Struct Funct. 1998; 23:33–42. [PubMed: 9639028]
224. Rhodes T, Barrand MA, Twentyman PR. Modification by brefeldin A, bafilomycin Al and 7-
chloro-4-nitrobenz-2-oxa-1,3-diazole (NBD) of cellular accumulation and intracellular
distribution of anthracyclines in the non-P-glycoprotein-mediated multidrug-resistant cell line
COR-L23/R. Br J Cancer. 1994; 70:60–66. [PubMed: 7912544]
225. Prasad PD, Mahesh VB, Leibach FH, Ganapathy V. Functional coupling between a bafilomycin
Al-sensitive proton pump and a probenecid-sensitive folate transporter in human placental
choriocarcinoma cells. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1994; 1222:309–314. [PubMed: 8031869]
226. Kinoshita K, Hidaka H, Ohkuma S. Induction of phagocytic activity of M1 cells by an inhibitor of
vacuolar H+-ATPase, bafilomycin A1. FEBS Lett. 1994; 337:221–225. [PubMed: 7507442]
227. Henomatsu N, Yoshimori T, Yamamoto A, Moriyama Y, Tashiro Y. Inhibition of intracellular
transport of newly synthesized prolactin by bafilomycin Al in a pituitary tumor cell line, GH3
cells. Eur J Cell Biol. 1993; 62:127-139. [PubMed: 8269970]
228. Heinle S, Stünkel K, Zähner H, Drautz H, Bessler WG. Immunosuppressive effects of the
macrolide antibiotic bafilomycin towards lymphocytes and lymphoid cell lines.
Arzneimittelforschung. 1988; 38:1130–1133. [PubMed: 3264168]
229. Jäger H, Dreker T, Buck A, Giehl K, Gress T, et al. Blockage of intermediate-conductance Ca2+ -
activated K+ channels inhibit human pancreatic cancer cell growth in vitro. Mol Pharmacol.
2004; 65:630-638. [PubMed: 14978241]
230. Schuller HM, Al-Wadei HA. Neurotransmitter receptors as central regulators of pancreatic
cancer. Future Oncol. 2010; 6:221-228. [PubMed: 20146581]
231. Entschladen F, Lang K, Drell TL, Joseph J, Zaenker KS. Neurotransmitters are regulators for the
migration of tumor cells and leukocytes. Cancer Immunol Immunother. 2002; 51:467-482.
[PubMed: 12357318]
232. Ortega A. A new role for GABA: inhibition of tumor cell migration. Trends Pharmacol Sci. 2003;
24:151-154. [PubMed: 12706998]
233. Schuller HM, Al-Wadei HA, Majidi M. Gamma-aminobutyric acid, a potential tumor suppressor
for small airway-derived lung adenocarcinoma. Carcinogenesis. 2008; 29:1979–1985. [PubMed:
18310090]
234. Schuller HM, Al-Wadei HA, Majidi M. GABA B receptor is a novel drug target for pancreatic
cancer. Cancer. 2008; 112:767-778. [PubMed: 18098271]
235. Frede J, Fraser SP, Oskay-Özcelik G, Hong Y, Ioana Braicu E, et al. Ovarian cancer: Ion channel
and aquaporin expression as novel targets of clinical potential. Eur J Cancer. 2013; 49:2331-
2344. [PubMed: 23683551]
236. Speyer CL, Smith JS, Banda M, DeVries JA, Mekani T, et al. Metabotropic glutamate receptor-1:
a potential therapeutic target for the treatment of breast cancer. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2012;
132:565-573. [PubMed: 21681448]
237. Yildirim S, Altun S, Gumushan H, Patel A, Djamgoz MB. Voltage-gated sodium channel activity
promotes prostate cancer metastasis in vivo. Cancer Lett. 2012; 323:58–61. [PubMed: 22484465]
238. Spugnini EP, Citro G, Fais S. Proton pump inhibitors as anti vacuolar-ATPases drugs: a novel
anticancer strategy. J Exp Clin Cancer Res. 2010; 29:44. [PubMed: 20459683]
239. Gupta PB, Onder TT, Jiang G, Tao K, Kuperwasser C, et al. Identification of selective inhibitors
of cancer stem cells by high-throughput screening. Cell. 2009; 138:645–659. [PubMed:
19682730]
240. Schickling BM, Aykin-Burns N, Leslie KK, Spitz DR, Korovkina VP. An inhibitor of K+
channels modulates human endometrial tumor-initiating cells. Cancer Cell Int. 2011; 11:25.
[PubMed: 21810252]
241. Kometiani P, Liu L, Askari A. Digitalis-induced signaling by Na+/K+-ATPase in human breast
cancer cells. Mol Pharmacol. 2005; 67:929–936. [PubMed: 15602003]
242. Blackiston DJ, McLaughlin KA, Levin M. Bioelectric controls of cell proliferation: ion channels,
membrane voltage and the cell cycle. Cell Cycle. 2009; 8:3519-3528.
243. Rubin H. Mechanisms for enduring biological change. Am J Physiol. 1992; 262:L111–113.
[PubMed: 1733276]
244. Rubin H. On the nature of enduring modifications induced in cells and organisms. Am J Physiol.
1990; 258:L19-24. [PubMed: 2407139]
245. Hahn WC, Weinberg RA. Rules for making human tumor cells. N Engl J Med. 2002; 347:1593-
1603. [PubMed: 12432047]
246. Huang S, Ingber DE. A non-genetic basis for cancer progression and metastasis: self-organizing
attractors in cell regulatory networks. Breast Dis. 2006; 26:27–54. [PubMed: 17473364]
247. Cone CD Jr. Unified theory on the basic mechanism of normal mitotic control and oncogenesis. J
Theor Biol. 1971; 30:151–181. [PubMed: 5555269]
248. Cone CD Jr. The role of the surface electrical transmembrane potential in normal and malignant
mitogenesis. Ann NY Acad Sci. 1974; 238:420-435. [PubMed: 4613241]
249. Binggeli R, Weinstein RC. Membrane potentials and sodium channels: hypotheses for growth
regulation and cancer formation based on changes in sodium channels and gap junctions. J Theor
Biol. 1986; 123:377–401. [PubMed: 2443763]
250. Binggeli R, Cameron IL. Cellular potentials of normal and cancerous fibroblasts and hepatocytes.
Cancer Res. 1980; 40:1830-1835. [PubMed: 7371014]
251. Burr HS. Biologic Organization and the Cancer Problem. Yale J Biol Med. 1940; 12:277–282.
[PubMed: 21433882]
252. Burr HS, Strong LC, Smith GM. Bio-Electric Correlates of Methylcolanthrene-Induced Tumors
in Mice. Yale J Biol Med. 1938; 10:539–544. [PubMed: 21433788]
253. House CD, Vaske CJ, Schwartz AM, Obias V, Frank B, et al. Voltage-gated Na+ channel SCN5A
is a key regulator of a gene transcriptional network that controls colon cancer invasion. Cancer
Res. 2010; 70:6957-6967. [PubMed: 20651255]
254. Stojadinovic A, Nissan A, Gallimidi Z, Lenington S, Logan W, et al. Electrical impedance
scanning for the early detection of breast cancer in young women: preliminary results of a
multicenter prospective clinical trial. J Clin Oncol. 2005; 23:2703–2715. [PubMed: 15837985]
255. Bauer J, Capra S, Davies PS. Estimation of total body water from foot-to-foot bioelectrical
impedance analysis in patients with cancer cachexia - agreement between three prediction
methods and deuterium oxide dilution. J Hum Nutr Diet. 2005; 18:295-300. [PubMed:
16011566]
256. Aberg P, Geladi P, Nicander I, Hansson J, Holmgren U, et al. Non-invasive and microinvasive
electrical impedance spectra of skin cancer - a comparison between two techniques. Skin Res
Technol. 2005; 11:281-286. [PubMed: 16221145]
257. Gupta D, Lis CG, Dahlk SL, Vashi PG, Grutsch JF, et al. Bioelectrical impedance phase angle as
a prognostic indicator in advanced pancreatic cancer. Br J Nutr. 2004; 92:957–962. [PubMed:
15613258]
258. Gupta D, Lammersfeld CA, Burrows JL, Dahlk SL, Vashi PG, et al. Bioelectrical impedance
phase angle in clinical practice: implications for prognosis in advanced colorectal cancer. Am J
Clin Nutr. 2004; 80:1634–1638. [PubMed: 15585779]
259. Gatta L. Study group on the application of extracellular bioimpedance tomography (Gastro-
Mida(x)) in the diagnosis of colorectal diseases. The clinical role of extracellular bioimpedance
tomography (Gastro-Mida(x)) in the diagnosis of colorectal diseases. Minerva Med. 2004;
95:541-556. [PubMed: 15785439]
260. Aberg P, Nicander I, Hansson J, Geladi P, Holmgren U, et al. Skin cancer identification using
multifrequency electrical impedance--a potential screening tool. IEEE Trans Biomed Eng. 2004;
51:2097-2102. [PubMed: 15605856]
261. Toso S, Piccoli A, Gusella M, Menon D, Bononi A, et al. Altered tissue electric properties in lung
cancer patients as detected by bioelectric impedance vector analysis. Nutrition. 2000; 16:120-
124. [PubMed: 10696635]
262. Konishi Y, Morimoto T, Kinouchi Y, Iritani T, Monden Y. Electrical properties of extracted rat
liver tissue. Res Exp Med (Berl). 1995; 195:183–192. [PubMed: 8525068]
263. Kimura S, Morimoto T, Uyama T, Monden Y, Kinouchi Y, et al. Application of electrical
impedance analysis for diagnosis of a pulmonary mass. Chest. 1994; 105:1679–1682. [PubMed:
8205860]
264. Morimoto T, Kimura S, Konishi Y, Komaki K, Uyama T, et al. A study of the electrical bio-
impedance of tumors. J Invest Surg. 1993; 6:25-32. [PubMed: 8452822]
265. Morimoto T, Kinouchi Y, Iritani T, Kimura S, Konishi Y, et al. Measurement of the electrical
bio-impedance of breast tumors. Eur Surg Res. 1990; 22:86–92. [PubMed: 2384126]
266. Davies RJ, Joseph R, Asbun H, Sedwitz M. Detection of the cancer-prone colon, using
transepithelial impedance analysis. Arch Surg. 1989; 124:480–484. [PubMed: 2930357]
267. Cuzick J, Holland R, Barth V, Davies R, Faupel M, et al. Electropotential measurements as a new
diagnostic modality for breast cancer. Lancet. 1998; 352:359-363. [PubMed: 9717923]
268. Faupel M, Vanel D, Barth V, Davies R, Fentiman IS, et al. Electropotential evaluation as a new
technique for diagnosing breast lesions. Eur J Radiol. 1997; 24:33–38. [PubMed: 9056147]
269. Moyer MP, Moyer RC, Waite MR. A survey of intracellular Na+ and K+ of various normal,
transformed, and tumor cells. J Cell Physiol. 1982; 113:129–133. [PubMed: 7130286]
270. Ouwerkerk R, Jacobs MA, Macura KJ, Wolff AC, Stearns V, et al. Elevated tissue sodium
concentration in malignant breast lesions detected with non-invasive 23Na MRI. Breast Cancer
Res Treat. 2007; 106:151-160. [PubMed: 17260093]
271. Beech JA. Bioelectric potential gradients may initiate cell cycling: ELF and zeta potential
gradients may mimic this effect. Bioelectromagnetics. 1997; 18:341-348. [PubMed: 9209715]
272. Dahmane N, Lee J, Robins P, Heller P, Ruiz i Altaba A. Activation of the transcription factor
Glil and the Sonic hedgehog signalling pathway in skin tumours. Nature. 1997; 389:876–881.
[PubMed: 9349822]
273. Wallingford JB, Seufert DW, Virta VC, Vize PD. p53 activity is essential for normal
development in Xenopus. Curr Biol. 1997; 7:747–757. [PubMed: 9368757]
274. Yang S, Lockwood A, Hollett P, Ford R, Kao K. Overexpression of a novel Xenopus rel mRNA
gene induces tumors in early embryos. J Biol Chem. 1998; 273:13746–13752. [PubMed:
9593716]
275. Le X, Langenau DM, Keefe MD, Kutok JL, Neuberg DS, et al. Heat shock-inducible Cre/Lox
approaches to induce diverse types of tumors and hyperplasia in transgenic zebrafish. Proc Natl
Acad Sci USA. 2007; 104:9410-9415. [PubMed: 17517602]
276. Stratton MR, Fisher C, Gusterson BA, Cooper CS. Detection of point mutations in N-ras and K-
ras genes of human embryonal rhabdomyosarcomas using oligonucleotide probes and the
polymerase chain reaction. Cancer Res. 1989; 49:6324–6327. [PubMed: 2680062]
277. Gilmore TD, Kalaitzidis D, Liang MC, Starczynowski DT. The c-Rel transcription factor and B-
cell proliferation: a deal with the devil. Oncogene. 2004; 23:2275–2286. [PubMed: 14755244]
278. McNulty SE, del Rosario R, Cen D, Meyskens FL Jr, Yang S. Comparative expression of
NFkappaB proteins in melanocytes of normal skin vs. benign intradermal naevus and human
metastatic melanoma biopsies. Pigment Cell Res. 2004; 17:173-180. [PubMed: 15016307]
279. Clement V, Sanchez P, de Tribolet N, Radovanovic I, Ruiz i Altaba A. HEDGEHOG-GLI1
signaling regulates human glioma growth, cancer stem cell self-renewal, and tumorigenicity.
Curr Biol. 2007; 17:165–172. [PubMed: 17196391]
280. Wolff C, Fuks B, Chatelain P. Comparative study of membrane potential-sensitive fluorescent
probes and their use in ion channel screening assays. J Biomol Screen. 2003; 8:533-543.
[PubMed: 14567780]
281. Lobikin M, Chernet B, Lobo D, Levin M. Resting potential, oncogene-induced tumorigenesis,
and metastasis: the bioelectric basis of cancer in vivo. Phys Biol. 2012; 9:065002. [PubMed:
23196890]
282. Thompson IM, Pauler DK, Goodman PJ, Tangen CM, Lucia MS, et al. Prevalence of prostate
cancer among men with a prostate-specific antigen level < or =4.0 ng per milliliter. N Engl J
Med. 2004; 350:2239–2246. [PubMed: 15163773]
283. Smith DS, Humphrey PA, Catalona WJ. The early detection of prostate carcinoma with prostate
specific antigen: the Washington University experience. Cancer. 1997; 80:1852–1856. [PubMed:
9351559]
284. Shin EH, Li Y, Kumar U, Sureka HV, Zhang X, et al. Membrane potential mediates the cellular
binding of nanoparticles. Nanoscale. 2013; 5:5879-5886. [PubMed: 23698734]
285. Boddapati SV, Tongcharoensirikul P, Hanson RN, D'Souza GG, Torchilin VP, et al.
Mitochondriotropic liposomes. J Liposome Res. 2005; 15:49–58. [PubMed: 16194927]
286. BURR HS. Electrometrics of atypical growth. Yale J Biol Med. 1952; 25:67–75. [PubMed:
13006405]
287. Burr HS. Changes in the Field Properties of Mice with Transplanted Tumors. Yale J Biol Med.
1941; 13:783-788. [PubMed: 21433982]
288. Nordenström BE. The paradigm of biologically closed electric circuits (BCEC) and the formation
of an International Association (IABC) for BCEC systems. Eur J Surg Suppl. 1994:7-23.
[PubMed: 7531025]
289. Nordenstrom, B.; Naslund, I.; Nordenstrom, J.; Wersall, P. Activation of Bcec-Channels for
Electrochemical Therapy (Ect) of Cancer - Foreword. Proceedings of the Iabc International-
Association-for- Biologically-Closed-Electric-Circuits (Bcec) in Medicine and Biology;
Stockholm. September 12-15, 1993; 1994.
290. Nordenström BE. Impact of biologically closed electric circuits (BCEC) on structure and
function. Integr Physiol Behav Sci. 1992; 27:285-303. [PubMed: 1286033]
291. Pandiella A, Magni M, Lovisolo D, Meldolesi J. The effect of epidermal growth factor on
membrane potential. Rapid hyperpolarization followed by persistent fluctuations. J Biol Chem.
1989; 264:12914–12921. [PubMed: 2787795]
292. Maffini MV, Soto AM, Calabro JM, Ucci AA, Sonnenschein C. The stroma as a crucial target in
rat mammary gland carcinogenesis. J Cell Sci. 2004; 117:1495-1502. [PubMed: 14996910]
293. Sun YJ, Long DX, Li W, Hou WY, Wu YJ, et al. Effects of avermectins on neurite outgrowth in
differentiating mouse neuroblastoma N2a cells. Toxicol Lett. 2010; 192:206–211. [PubMed:
19879343]
294. Sharmeen S, Skrtic M, Sukhai MA, Hurren R, Gronda M, et al. The antiparasitic agent ivermectin
induces chloride-dependent membrane hyperpolarization and cell death in leukemia cells. Blood.
2010; 116:3593-3603. [PubMed: 20644115]
295. Ottesen EA, Campbell WC. Ivermectin in human medicine. J Antimicrob Chemother. 1994;
34:195-203. [PubMed: 7814280]
296. Duke BO, Marty AM, Peett DL, Gardo J, Pion SD, et al. Neoplastic change in Onchocerca
volvulus and its relation to ivermectin treatment. Parasitology. 2002; 125:431-444. [PubMed:
12458827]
297. Vafa B, Lewis TM, Cunningham AM, Jacques P, Lynch JW, et al. Identification of a new ligand
binding domain in the alphal subunit of the inhibitory glycine receptor. J Neurochem. 1999;
73:2158-2166. [PubMed: 10537076]
298. Aw S, Adams DS, Qiu D, Levin M. H,K-ATPase protein localization and Kir4.1 function reveal
concordance of three axes during early determination of left-right asymmetry. Mech Dev. 2008;
125:353-372. [PubMed: 18160269]
299. O'Connor PJ, MacNaught F, Butler WH, Cooper DP, Margison GP, et al. Increased pathology
incidence in the forestomach of rats maintained on a diet containing ivermectin and given a
single dose of N-methyl-N1-nitro-N-nitrosoguanidine. J Environ Pathol Toxicol Oncol. 2001;
20:223-227. [PubMed: 11797831]
300. Miyauchi S, Gopal E, Fei YJ, Ganapathy V. Functional identification of SLC5A8, a tumor
suppressor down-regulated in colon cancer, as a Na(+)-coupled transporter for short-chain fatty
acids. J Biol Chem. 2004; 279:13293–13296. [PubMed: 14966140]
301. Ueno M, Toyota M, Akino K, Suzuki H, Kusano M, et al. Aberrant methylation and histone
deacetylation associated with silencing of SLC5A8 in gastric cancer. Tumour Biol. 2004;
25:134-140. [PubMed: 15361710]
302. Hu S, Liu D, Tufano RP, Carson KA, Rosenbaum E, et al. Association of aberrant methylation of
tumor suppressor genes with tumor aggressiveness and BRAF mutation in papillary thyroid
cancer. Int J Cancer. 2006; 119:2322-2329. [PubMed: 16858683]
303. Paroder V, Spencer SR, Paroder M, Arango D, Schwartz S Jr, et al. Na(+)/monocarboxylate
transport (SMCT) protein expression correlates with survival in colon cancer: molecular
characterization of SMCT. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2006; 103:7270–7275. [PubMed:
16670197]
304. Ganapathy V, Thangaraju M, Gopal E, Martin PM, Itagaki S, et al. Sodium-coupled
monocarboxylate transporters in normal tissues and in cancer. AAPS J. 2008; 10:193–199.
[PubMed: 18446519]
305. Park JY, Helm JF, Zheng W, Ly QP, Hodul PJ, et al. Silencing of the candidate tumor suppressor
gene solute carrier family 5 member 8 (SLC5A8) in human pancreatic cancer. Pancreas. 2008;
36:e32-39. [PubMed: 18437076]
306. Li H, Myeroff L, Smiraglia D, Romero MF, Pretlow TP, et al. SLC5A8, a sodium transporter, is a
tumor suppressor gene silenced by methylation in human colon aberrant crypt foci and cancers.
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2003; 100:8412-8417. [PubMed: 12829793]
307. Siavoshian S, Segain JP, Kornprobst M, Bonnet C, Cherbut C, et al. Butyrate and trichostatin A
effects on the proliferation/differentiation of human intestinal epithelial cells: induction of cyclin
D3 and p21 expression. Gut. 2000; 46:507–514. [PubMed: 10716680]
308. Archer SY, Meng S, Shei A, Hodin RA. p21(WAF1) is required for butyrate-mediated growth
inhibition of human colon cancer cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 1998; 95:6791-6796. [PubMed:
9618491]
309. Morozova, N.; Shubin, M. Pattern Formation in Morphogenesis. Springer; Berlin Heidelberg:
2013.
310. Beloussov LV, Opitz JM, Gilbert SF. Life of Alexander G. Gurwitsch and his relevant
contribution to the theory of morphogenetic fields. Int J Dev Biol. 1997; 41:771-777. [PubMed:
9449452]
311. Balls M, Ruben Ln. Variation In The Response Of Xenopus Laevis To Normal Tissue
Homografts. Dev Biol. 1964; 10:92–104. [PubMed: 14201349]

294. Sharmeen S, Skrtic M, Sukhai MA, Hurren R, Gronda M, et al. The antiparasitic agent ivermectin induces chloride-dependent membrane hyperpolarization and cell death in leukemia cells. Blood. 2010; 116:3593-3603. [PubMed: 20644115]
295. Ottesen EA, Campbell WC. Ivermectin in human medicine. J Antimicrob Chemother. 1994; 34:195-203. [PubMed: 7814280]
296. Duke BO, Marty AM, Peett DL, Gardo J, Pion SD, et al. Neoplastic change in Onchocerca volvulus and its relation to ivermectin treatment. Parasitology. 2002; 125:431-444. [PubMed: 12458827]
297. Vafa B, Lewis TM, Cunningham AM, Jacques P, Lynch JW, et al. Identification of a new ligand binding domain in the alphal subunit of the inhibitory glycine receptor. J Neurochem. 1999; 73:2158-2166. [PubMed: 10537076]
298. Aw S, Adams DS, Qiu D, Levin M. H,K-ATPase protein localization and Kir4.1 function reveal concordance of three axes during early determination of left-right asymmetry. Mech Dev. 2008; 125:353-372. [PubMed: 18160269]
299. O'Connor PJ, MacNaught F, Butler WH, Cooper DP, Margison GP, et al. Increased pathology incidence in the forestomach of rats maintained on a diet containing ivermectin and given a single dose of N-methyl-N1-nitro-N-nitrosoguanidine. J Environ Pathol Toxicol Oncol. 2001; 20:223-227. [PubMed: 11797831]
300. Miyauchi S, Gopal E, Fei YJ, Ganapathy V. Functional identification of SLC5A8, a tumor suppressor down-regulated in colon cancer, as a Na(+)-coupled transporter for short-chain fatty acids. J Biol Chem. 2004; 279:13293–13296. [PubMed: 14966140]
301. Ueno M, Toyota M, Akino K, Suzuki H, Kusano M, et al. Aberrant methylation and histone deacetylation associated with silencing of SLC5A8 in gastric cancer. Tumour Biol. 2004; 25:134-140. [PubMed: 15361710]
302. Hu S, Liu D, Tufano RP, Carson KA, Rosenbaum E, et al. Association of aberrant methylation of tumor suppressor genes with tumor aggressiveness and BRAF mutation in papillary thyroid cancer. Int J Cancer. 2006; 119:2322-2329. [PubMed: 16858683]
303. Paroder V, Spencer SR, Paroder M, Arango D, Schwartz S Jr, et al. Na(+)/monocarboxylate transport (SMCT) protein expression correlates with survival in colon cancer: molecular characterization of SMCT. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2006; 103:7270–7275. [PubMed: 16670197]
304. Ganapathy V, Thangaraju M, Gopal E, Martin PM, Itagaki S, et al. Sodium-coupled monocarboxylate transporters in normal tissues and in cancer. AAPS J. 2008; 10:193–199. [PubMed: 18446519]
305. Park JY, Helm JF, Zheng W, Ly QP, Hodul PJ, et al. Silencing of the candidate tumor suppressor gene solute carrier family 5 member 8 (SLC5A8) in human pancreatic cancer. Pancreas. 2008; 36:e32-39. [PubMed: 18437076]
306. Li H, Myeroff L, Smiraglia D, Romero MF, Pretlow TP, et al. SLC5A8, a sodium transporter, is a tumor suppressor gene silenced by methylation in human colon aberrant crypt foci and cancers. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2003; 100:8412-8417. [PubMed: 12829793]
307. Siavoshian S, Segain JP, Kornprobst M, Bonnet C, Cherbut C, et al. Butyrate and trichostatin A effects on the proliferation/differentiation of human intestinal epithelial cells: induction of cyclin D3 and p21 expression. Gut. 2000; 46:507–514. [PubMed: 10716680]
308. Archer SY, Meng S, Shei A, Hodin RA. p21(WAF1) is required for butyrate-mediated growth inhibition of human colon cancer cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 1998; 95:6791-6796. [PubMed: 9618491]
309. Morozova, N.; Shubin, M. Pattern Formation in Morphogenesis. Springer; Berlin Heidelberg: 2013.
310. Beloussov LV, Opitz JM, Gilbert SF. Life of Alexander G. Gurwitsch and his relevant contribution to the theory of morphogenetic fields. Int J Dev Biol. 1997; 41:771-777. [PubMed: 9449452]
311. Balls M, Ruben Ln. Variation In The Response Of Xenopus Laevis To Normal Tissue Homografts. Dev Biol. 1964; 10:92–104. [PubMed: 14201349]
312. Stevens LC. The development of transplantable teratocarcinomas from intratesticular grafts of pre- and postimplantation mouse embryos. Dev Biol. 1970; 21:364–382. [PubMed: 5436899]
313. Parodi S, Brambilla G. Relationships between mutation and transformation frequencies in mammalian cells treated “in vitro" with chemical carcinogens. Mutat Res. 1977; 47:53–74. [PubMed: 342929]
314. Clark WH Jr. The nature of cancer: morphogenesis and progressive (self)-disorganization in neoplastic development and progression. Acta Oncol. 1995; 34:3–21. [PubMed: 7865232]
315. Kraemer PM, Travis GL, Ray FA, Cram LS. Spontaneous neoplastic evolution of Chinese hamster cells in culture: multistep progression of phenotype. Cancer Res. 1983; 43:4822-4827. [PubMed: 6883336]
316. Cram LS, Bartholdi MF, Ray FA, Travis GL, Kraemer PM. Spontaneous neoplastic evolution of Chinese hamster cells in culture: multistep progression of karyotype. Cancer Res. 1983; 43:4828-4837. [PubMed: 6883337]
317. Dolberg DS, Bissell MJ. Inability of Rous sarcoma virus to cause sarcomas in the avian embryo. Nature. 1984; 309:552-556. [PubMed: 6203040]
318. Bissell MJ, Radisky DC, Rizki A, Weaver VM, Petersen OW. The organizing principle: microenvironmental influences in the normal and malignant breast. Differentiation. 2002; 70:537-546. [PubMed: 12492495]
319. Barcellos-Hoff MH. It takes a tissue to make a tumor: epigenetics, cancer and the microenvironment. J Mammary Gland Biol Neoplasia. 2001; 6:213–221. [PubMed: 11501581]
320. Wang F, Weaver VM, Petersen OW, Larabell CA, Dedhar S, et al. Reciprocal interactions between betal-integrin and epidermal growth factor receptor in three-dimensional basement membrane breast cultures: a different perspective in epithelial biology. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 1998; 95:14821-14826. [PubMed: 9843973]
321. Oppenheimer BS, Oppenheimer ET, Stout AP. Sarcomas induced in rodents by imbedding various plastic films. Proc Soc Exp Biol Med. 1952; 79:366–369. [PubMed: 14920429]
322. Bischoff F, Bryson G. Carcinogenesis through Solid State Surfaces. Prog Exp Tumor Res. 1964; 5:85-133. [PubMed: 14317768]
323. Oppenheimer BS, Oppenheimer ET, Stout AP. Carcinogenic Effect Of Imbedding Various Plastic Films In Rats And Mice. Surg Forum. 1953; 4:672-676. [PubMed: 13187362]
324. OPPENHEIMER BS, OPPENHEIMER ET, STOUT AP, DANISHEFSKY I. Malignant tumors resulting from embedding plastics in rodents. Science. 1953; 118:305–306. [PubMed: 13089687]
325. Wade MH, Trosko JE, Schindler M. A fluorescence photobleaching assay of gap junction-mediated communication between human cells. Science. 1986; 232:525-528. [PubMed: 3961495]
326. Ruch RJ, Trosko JE. Gap-junction communication in chemical carcinogenesis. Drug Metab Rev. 2001; 33:117-124. [PubMed: 11270660]
327. Duflot-Dancer A, Mesnil M, Yamasaki H. Dominant-negative abrogation of connexin-mediated cell growth control by mutant connexin genes. Oncogene. 1997; 15:2151–2158. [PubMed: 9393973]
328. Yamasaki H, Krutovskikh V, Mesnil M, Tanaka T, Zaidan-Dagli ML, et al. Role of connexin (gap junction) genes in cell growth control and carcinogenesis. CR Acad Sci III. 1999; 322:151–159. [PubMed: 10196667]
329. Omori Y, Zaidan Dagli ML, Yamakage K, Yamasaki H. Involvement of gap junctions in tumor suppression: analysis of genetically-manipulated mice. Mutat Res. 2001; 477:191–196. [PubMed: 11376700]
330. Yamasaki H, Mesnil M, Omori Y, Mironov N, Krutovskikh V. Intercellular communication and carcinogenesis. Mutat Res. 1995; 333:181–188. [PubMed: 8538626]
331. Temme A, Buchmann A, Gabriel HD, Nelles E, Schwarz M, et al. High incidence of spontaneous and chemically induced liver tumors in mice deficient for connexin32. Curr Biol. 1997; 7:713-716. [PubMed: 9285723]
332. Loewenstein WR. Junctional cell-to-cell communication and growth control. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 1980; 339:39-45. [PubMed: 6249141]
333. Loewenstein WR. Junctional intercellular communication and the control of growth. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1979; 560:1–65. [PubMed: 216404]
334. Loewenstein WR. Transfer of information through cell junctions and growth control. Proc Can Cancer Conf. 1969; 8:162-170. [PubMed: 5792934]
335. Loewenstein WR, Kanno Y. Intercellular communication and the control of tissue growth: lack of communication between cancer cells. Nature. 1966; 209:1248-1249. [PubMed: 5956321]
336. Rose B, Mehta PP, Loewenstein WR. Gap-junction protein gene suppresses tumorigenicity. Carcinogenesis. 1993; 14:1073–1075. [PubMed: 8389252]
337. Mesnil M, Crespin S, Avanzo JL, Zaidan-Dagli ML. Defective gap junctional intercellular communication in the carcinogenic process. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2005; 1719:125–145. [PubMed: 16359943]
338. Stoletov K, Strnadel J, Zardouzian E, Momiyama M, Park FD, et al. Role of connexins in metastatic breast cancer and melanoma brain colonization. J Cell Sci. 2013; 126:904-913. [PubMed: 23321642]
339. Moreno E. Is cell competition relevant to cancer? Nat Rev Cancer. 2008; 8:141–147. [PubMed: 18185517]
340. Dobrowolski R, Hertig G, Lechner H, Wörsdörfer P, Wulf V, et al. Loss of connexin43-mediated gap junctional coupling in the mesenchyme of limb buds leads to altered expression of morphogens in mice. Hum Mol Genet. 2009; 18:2899–2911. [PubMed: 19439426]
341. Jin EJ, Lee SY, Jung JC, Bang OS, Kang SS. TGF-beta3 inhibits chondrogenesis of cultured chick leg bud mesenchymal cells via downregulation of connexin 43 and integrin beta4. J Cell Physiol. 2008; 214:345-353. [PubMed: 17620312]
342. Pizard A, Burgon PG, Paul DL, Bruneau BG, Seidman CE, et al. Connexin 40, a target of transcription factor Tbx5, patterns wrist, digits, and sternum. Mol Cell Biol. 2005; 25:5073-5083. [PubMed: 15923624]
343. Levin M, Mercola M. Expression of connexin 30 in Xenopus embryos and its involvement in hatching gland function. Dev Dyn. 2000; 219:96-101. [PubMed: 10974676]
344. Lecanda F, Warlow PM, Sheikh S, Furlan F, Steinberg TH, et al. Connexin43 deficiency causes delayed ossification, craniofacial abnormalities, and osteoblast dysfunction. J Cell Biol. 2000; 151:931-944. [PubMed: 11076975]
345. Warner A. Interactions between growth factors and gap junctional communication in developing systems. Novartis Found Symp. 1999; 219:60–72. [PubMed: 10207898]
346. Levin M. Gap junctional communication in morphogenesis. Prog Biophys Mol Biol. 2007; 94:186-206. [PubMed: 17481700]
347. Schiffmann Y. The Turing-Child energy field as a driver of early mammalian development. Prog Biophys Mol Biol. 2008; 98:107–117. [PubMed: 18680762]
348. Gray RS, Roszko I, Solnica-Krezel L. Planar cell polarity: coordinating morphogenetic cell behaviors with embryonic polarity. Dev Cell. 2011; 21:120-133. [PubMed: 21763613]
349. Lee M, Vasioukhin V. Cell polarity and cancer--cell and tissue polarity as a non-canonical tumor suppressor. J Cell Sci. 2008; 121:1141–1150. [PubMed: 18388309]
350. Klezovitch O, Fernandez TE, Tapscott SJ, Vasioukhin V. Loss of cell polarity causes severe brain dysplasia in Lgl1 knockout mice. Genes Dev. 2004; 18:559–571. [PubMed: 15037549]
351. Wodarz A, Näthke I. Cell polarity in development and cancer. Nat Cell Biol. 2007; 9:1016–1024. [PubMed: 17762893]
352. Devenport D, Fuchs E. Planar polarization in embryonic epidermis orchestrates global asymmetric morphogenesis of hair follicles. Nat Cell Biol. 2008; 10:1257-1268. [PubMed: 18849982]
353. SCHARRER B. Insect tumors induced by nerve severance: incidence and mortality. Cancer Res. 1953; 13:73-76. [PubMed: 13032953]
354. SCHARRER B, LOCHHEAD MS. Tumors in the invertebrates: a review. Cancer Res. 1950; 10:403-419. [PubMed: 15427079]
355. Pawlowski A, Weddell G. Induction of tumors in denervated skin. Nature. 1967; 213:1234-1236. 
356. Outzen HC, Custer RP, Prehn RT. Influence of regenerative capacity and innervation on oncogenesis in the adult frog (Rana pipiens). J Natl Cancer Inst. 1976; 57:79–84. [PubMed: 1087345]
357. Burr HS. The Meaning of Bio-Electric Potentials. Yale J Biol Med. 1944; 16:353-360. [PubMed: 21434154]
358. Becker RO. The basic biological data transmission and control system influenced by electrical forces. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 1974; 238:236-241. [PubMed: 4531264]
359. Burr HS. Field Properties of the Developing Frog's Egg. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 1941; 27:276-281. [PubMed: 16588458]
360. Burr HS, Northrop FS. Evidence for the Existence of an Electro-Dynamic Field in Living Organisms. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 1939; 25:284-288. [PubMed: 16577899]
361. Camphausen K, Purow B, Sproull M, Scott T, Ozawa T, et al. Influence of in vivo growth on human glioma cell line gene expression: convergent profiles under orthotopic conditions. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2005; 102:8287-8292. [PubMed: 15928080]
362. Seilern-Aspang, F.; Kratochwill, L. Regeneration in animals and related problems. North-Holland Publishing Company; 1965.
363. Auerbach R, Morrissey LW, Kubai L, Sidky YA. Regional differences in tumor growth: studies of the vascular system. Int J Cancer. 1978; 22:40-46. [PubMed: 98454]
364. Auerbach R, Morrissey LW, Sidky YA. Gradients in tumour growth. Nature. 1978; 274:697-699. [PubMed: 673003]
365. Auerbach R, Morrissey LW, Sidky YA. Regional differences in the incidence and growth of mouse tumors following intradermal or subcutaneous inoculation. Cancer Res. 1978; 38:1739–1744. [PubMed: 647684]
366. Auerbach R, Auerbach W. Regional differences in the growth of normal and neoplastic cells. Science. 1982; 215:127-134. [PubMed: 7053564]
367. Kubai L, Auerbach R. Regional differences in the growth of skin transplants. Transplantation. 1980; 30:128-131. [PubMed: 7010707]
368. Morrissey LW, Sidky YA, Auerbach R. Regional differences in the growth of tumor cells injected intraperitoneally into syngeneic adult mice. Cancer Res. 1980; 40:2197–2201. [PubMed: 7388788]
369. Biskind MS, Biskind GR. Tumor of rat testis produced by heterotransplantation of infantile testis to spleen of adult castrate. Proc Soc Exp Biol Med. 1945; 59:4-8.
370. Biskind MS, Biskind GS. Development of tumors in the rat ovary after transplantation into the spleen. Proc Soc Exp Biol Med. 1944; 55:176–179.
371. Mintz B, Illmensee K. Normal genetically mosaic mice produced from malignant teratocarcinoma cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 1975; 72:3585-3589. [PubMed: 1059147]
372. Illmensee K, Mintz B. Totipotency and normal differentiation of single teratocarcinoma cells cloned by injection into blastocysts. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 1976; 73:549–553. [PubMed: 1061157]
373. Astigiano S, Damonte P, Fossati S, Boni L, Barbieri O. Fate of embryonal carcinoma cells injected into postimplantation mouse embryos. Differentiation. 2005; 73:484-490. [PubMed: 16351692]
374. Webb CG, Gootwine E, Sachs L. Developmental potential of myeloid leukemia cells injected into midgestation embryos. Dev Biol. 1984; 101:221-224. [PubMed: 6229433]
375. Li L, Connelly MC, Wetmore C, Curran T, Morgan JI. Mouse embryos cloned from brain tumors. Cancer Res. 2003; 63:2733-2736. [PubMed: 12782575]
376. Pierce GB, Wells RS. The blastocyst in control of embryonal carcinoma. Prog Clin Biol Res. 1982; 85(Pt B):593–600. [PubMed: 7122581]
377. Pierce GB, Arechaga J, Wells RS. Embryonic control of cancer. Prog Clin Biol Res. 1986; 226:67-77. [PubMed: 3543969]
378. Podesta AH, Mullins J, Pierce GB, Wells RS. The neurula stage mouse embryo in control of neuroblastoma. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 1984; 81:7608-7611. [PubMed: 6594704]
379. Pierce GB, Aguilar D, Hood G, Wells RS. Trophectoderm in control of murine embryonal carcinoma. Cancer Res. 1984; 44:3987-3996. [PubMed: 6744314]
380. Pierce GB. The cancer cell and its control by the embryo. Rous-Whipple Award lecture. Am J Pathol. 1983; 113:117-124. [PubMed: 6312802]
381. Pierce GB, Pantazis CG, Caldwell JE, Wells RS. Specificity of the control of tumor formation by the blastocyst. Cancer Res. 1982; 42:1082–1087. [PubMed: 6277473]
382. Haldi M, Ton C, Seng WL, McGrath P. Human melanoma cells transplanted into zebrafish proliferate, migrate, produce melanin, form masses and stimulate angiogenesis in zebrafish. Angiogenesis. 2006; 9:139–151. [PubMed: 17051341]
383. Lee LM, Seftor EA, Bonde G, Cornell RA, Hendrix MJ. The fate of human malignant melanoma cells transplanted into zebrafish embryos: assessment of migration and cell division in the absence of tumor formation. Dev Dyn. 2005; 233:1560–1570. [PubMed: 15968639]
384. Kasemeier-Kulesa JC, Teddy JM, Postovit LM, Seftor EA, Seftor RE, et al. Reprogramming multipotent tumor cells with the embryonic neural crest microenvironment. Dev Dyn. 2008; 237:2657-2666. [PubMed: 18629870]
385. Hendrix MJ, Seftor EA, Seftor RE, Kasemeier-Kulesa J, Kulesa PM, et al. Reprogramming metastatic tumour cells with embryonic microenvironments. Nat Rev Cancer. 2007; 7:246-255. [PubMed: 17384580]
386. Kulesa PM, Kasemeier-Kulesa JC, Teddy JM, Margaryan NV, Seftor EA, et al. Reprogramming metastatic melanoma cells to assume a neural crest cell-like phenotype in an embryonic microenvironment. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2006; 103:3752-3757. [PubMed: 16505384]
387. Hochedlinger K, Blelloch R, Brennan C, Yamada Y, Kim M, et al. Reprogramming of a melanoma genome by nuclear transplantation. Genes Dev. 2004; 18:1875–1885. [PubMed: 15289459]
388. Kenny PA, Bissell MJ. Tumor reversion: correction of malignant behavior by microenvironmental cues. Int J Cancer. 2003; 107:688-695. [PubMed: 14566816]
389. Zhang W, Remenyik E, Zelterman D, Brash DE, Wikonkal NM. Escaping the stem cell compartment: sustained UVB exposure allows p53-mutant keratinocytes to colonize adjacent epidermal proliferating units without incurring additional mutations. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America. 2001; 98:13948–13953. [PubMed: 11707578]
390. Chao DL, Eck JT, Brash DE, Maley CC, Luebeck EG. Preneoplastic lesion growth driven by the death of adjacent normal stem cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2008; 105:15034-15039. [PubMed: 18815380]
391. Pierce GB, Speers WC. Tumors as caricatures of the process of tissue renewal: prospects for therapy by directing differentiation. Cancer Res. 1988; 48:1996–2004. [PubMed: 2450643]
392. Dvorak HF. Tumors: wounds that do not heal. Similarities between tumor stroma generation and wound healing. N Engl J Med. 1986; 315:1650–1659. [PubMed: 3537791]
393. Tsonis PA. Effects of carcinogens on regenerating and non-regenerating limbs in amphibia (review). Anticancer Res. 1983; 3:195–202. [PubMed: 6347032]
394. Wolsky A. Regeneration and cancer. Growth. 1978; 42:425-426. [PubMed: 750305]
395. Donaldson DJ, Mason JM. Cancer-related aspects of regeneration research: a review. Growth. 1975; 39:475-496. [PubMed: 1107167]
396. Ruben LN, Balls M, Stevens J. Cancer and super-regeneration in Triturus viridescens limbs. Experientia. 1966; 22:260–261. [PubMed: 6012641]
397. ROSE SM, WALLINGFORD HM. Transformation of renal tumors of frogs to normal tissues in regenerating limbs of salamanders. Science. 1948; 107:457. [PubMed: 18938459]
398. Brockes JP. Regeneration and cancer. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1998; 1377:M1–11. [PubMed: 9540808]
399. Tsonis PA, Eguchi G. Carcinogens on regeneration. Effects of N-methyl-N'-nitro-N-nitrosoguanidine and 4-nitroquinoline-1-oxide on limb regeneration in adult newts. Differentiation. 1981; 20:52–60. [PubMed: 6796448]
400. Pizzarello DJ, Wolsky A. Carcinogenesis and regeneration in newts. Experientia. 1966; 22:387-388. [PubMed: 5961676]

379. Pierce GB, Aguilar D, Hood G, Wells RS. Trophectoderm in control of murine embryonal
carcinoma. Cancer Res. 1984; 44:3987-3996. [PubMed: 6744314]
380. Pierce GB. The cancer cell and its control by the embryo. Rous-Whipple Award lecture. Am J
Pathol. 1983; 113:117-124. [PubMed: 6312802]
381. Pierce GB, Pantazis CG, Caldwell JE, Wells RS. Specificity of the control of tumor formation by
the blastocyst. Cancer Res. 1982; 42:1082–1087. [PubMed: 6277473]
382. Haldi M, Ton C, Seng WL, McGrath P. Human melanoma cells transplanted into zebrafish
proliferate, migrate, produce melanin, form masses and stimulate angiogenesis in zebrafish.
Angiogenesis. 2006; 9:139–151. [PubMed: 17051341]
383. Lee LM, Seftor EA, Bonde G, Cornell RA, Hendrix MJ. The fate of human malignant melanoma
cells transplanted into zebrafish embryos: assessment of migration and cell division in the
absence of tumor formation. Dev Dyn. 2005; 233:1560–1570. [PubMed: 15968639]
384. Kasemeier-Kulesa JC, Teddy JM, Postovit LM, Seftor EA, Seftor RE, et al. Reprogramming
multipotent tumor cells with the embryonic neural crest microenvironment. Dev Dyn. 2008;
237:2657-2666. [PubMed: 18629870]
385. Hendrix MJ, Seftor EA, Seftor RE, Kasemeier-Kulesa J, Kulesa PM, et al. Reprogramming
metastatic tumour cells with embryonic microenvironments. Nat Rev Cancer. 2007; 7:246-255.
[PubMed: 17384580]
386. Kulesa PM, Kasemeier-Kulesa JC, Teddy JM, Margaryan NV, Seftor EA, et al. Reprogramming
metastatic melanoma cells to assume a neural crest cell-like phenotype in an embryonic
microenvironment. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2006; 103:3752-3757. [PubMed: 16505384]
387. Hochedlinger K, Blelloch R, Brennan C, Yamada Y, Kim M, et al. Reprogramming of a
melanoma genome by nuclear transplantation. Genes Dev. 2004; 18:1875–1885. [PubMed:
15289459]
388. Kenny PA, Bissell MJ. Tumor reversion: correction of malignant behavior by
microenvironmental cues. Int J Cancer. 2003; 107:688-695. [PubMed: 14566816]
389. Zhang W, Remenyik E, Zelterman D, Brash DE, Wikonkal NM. Escaping the stem cell
compartment: sustained UVB exposure allows p53-mutant keratinocytes to colonize adjacent
epidermal proliferating units without incurring additional mutations. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences of the United States of America. 2001; 98:13948–13953. [PubMed:
11707578]
390. Chao DL, Eck JT, Brash DE, Maley CC, Luebeck EG. Preneoplastic lesion growth driven by the
death of adjacent normal stem cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2008; 105:15034-15039.
[PubMed: 18815380]
391. Pierce GB, Speers WC. Tumors as caricatures of the process of tissue renewal: prospects for
therapy by directing differentiation. Cancer Res. 1988; 48:1996–2004. [PubMed: 2450643]
392. Dvorak HF. Tumors: wounds that do not heal. Similarities between tumor stroma generation and
wound healing. N Engl J Med. 1986; 315:1650–1659. [PubMed: 3537791]
393. Tsonis PA. Effects of carcinogens on regenerating and non-regenerating limbs in amphibia
(review). Anticancer Res. 1983; 3:195–202. [PubMed: 6347032]
394. Wolsky A. Regeneration and cancer. Growth. 1978; 42:425-426. [PubMed: 750305]
395. Donaldson DJ, Mason JM. Cancer-related aspects of regeneration research: a review. Growth.
1975; 39:475-496. [PubMed: 1107167]
396. Ruben LN, Balls M, Stevens J. Cancer and super-regeneration in Triturus viridescens limbs.
Experientia. 1966; 22:260–261. [PubMed: 6012641]
397. ROSE SM, WALLINGFORD HM. Transformation of renal tumors of frogs to normal tissues in
regenerating limbs of salamanders. Science. 1948; 107:457. [PubMed: 18938459]
398. Brockes JP. Regeneration and cancer. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1998; 1377:M1–11. [PubMed:
9540808]
399. Tsonis PA, Eguchi G. Carcinogens on regeneration. Effects of N-methyl-N'-nitro-N-
nitrosoguanidine and 4-nitroquinoline-1-oxide on limb regeneration in adult newts.
Differentiation. 1981; 20:52–60. [PubMed: 6796448]
400. Pizzarello DJ, Wolsky A. Carcinogenesis and regeneration in newts. Experientia. 1966; 22:387-
388. [PubMed: 5961676]
401. Okamoto M. Simultaneous demonstration of lens regeneration from dorsal iris and tumour
production from ventral iris in the same newt eye after carcinogen administration.
Differentiation. 1997; 61:285-292. [PubMed: 9342839]
402. Zilakos NP, Zafiratos CS, Parchment RE. Stage-dependent genetically-based deformities of the
regenerating newt limb from 4-nitroquinoline-N-oxide mutagenesis: potential embryonic
regulation of cancer. Differentiation. 1996; 60:67–74. [PubMed: 8641547]
403. SHEREMETIEVA EA. SPONTANEOUS MELANOMA IN REGENERATING TAILS OF
AXOLOTLS. J Exp Zool. 1965; 158:101–121. [PubMed: 14299677]
404. Prehn RT. Regeneration versus neoplastic growth. Carcinogenesis. 1997; 18:1439–1444.
[PubMed: 9276613]
405. BREEDIS C. Induction of accessory limbs and of sarcoma in the Newt (Triturus viridescens) with
carcinogenic substances. Cancer Res. 1952; 12:861-866. [PubMed: 13009672]
406. Farber E. Pre-cancerous steps in carcinogenesis. Their physiological adaptive nature. Biochim
Biophys Acta. 1984; 738:171–180. [PubMed: 6394048]
407. Farber E. The multistep nature of cancer development. Cancer Res. 1984; 44:4217-4223.
[PubMed: 6467183]
408. Coleman WB, Wennerberg AE, Smith GJ, Grisham JW. Regulation of the differentiation of
diploid and some aneuploid rat liver epithelial (stemlike) cells by the hepatic microenvironment.
Am J Pathol. 1993; 142:1373-1382. [PubMed: 8494041]
409. McCullough KD, Coleman WB, Ricketts SL, Wilson JW, Smith GJ, et al. Plasticity of the
neoplastic phenotype in vivo is regulated by epigenetic factors. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 1998;
95:15333-15338. [PubMed: 9860969]
410. Tatematsu M, Nagamine Y, Farber E. Redifferentiation as a basis for remodeling of carcinogen-
induced hepatocyte nodules to normal appearing liver. Cancer Res. 1983; 43:5049-5058.
[PubMed: 6137276]
411. Ogawa K, Solt DB, Farber E. Phenotypic diversity as an early property of putative preneoplastic
hepatocyte populations in liver carcinogenesis. Cancer Res. 1980; 40:725-733. [PubMed:
6110477]
412. Enomoto K, Farber E. Kinetics of phenotypic maturation of remodeling of hyperplastic nodules
during liver carcinogenesis. Cancer Res. 1982; 42:2330-2335. [PubMed: 6122502]
413. Zupanc GK. Adult neurogenesis and neuronal regeneration in the brain of teleost fish. J Physiol
Paris. 2008; 102:357-373. [PubMed: 18984045]
414. Richardson J, Zeng Z, Ceol C, Mione M, Jackson IJ, et al. A zebrafish model for nevus
regeneration. Pigment Cell Melanoma Res. 2011; 24:378-381. [PubMed: 21324102]
415. Pflugfelder. VERHANDL DEUTSCH ZOOL GES-ZOOL ANZ. 1938; 11(Suppl)
416. Pflugfelder. Wechselwirkungen von Drusen innerer Sekretion bei Dixippus morosus. Br Z Wiss
Zool. 1939; 152:384-408.
417. Pflugfelder. Z Krebsforsch. 1950
418. PFLUGFELDER O. Tumor formations in invertebrates and lower vertebrates. Strahlentherapie.
1954; 93:181-195. [PubMed: 13168780]
419. Brodeur GM. Neuroblastoma: biological insights into a clinical enigma. Nat Rev Cancer. 2003;
3:203-216. [PubMed: 12612655]
420. Nakagawara A. Molecular basis of spontaneous regression of neuroblastoma: role of neurotrophic
signals and genetic abnormalities. Hum Cell. 1998; 11:115-124. [PubMed: 10086274]
421. Marshall WF. Origins of cellular geometry. BMC Biol. 2011; 9:57. [PubMed: 21880160]
422. Noble D. A theory of biological relativity: no privileged level of causation. Interface Focus. 2012;
2:55-64. [PubMed: 23386960]
423. Ellis GFR, Noble D, O'Connor T. Top-down causation: an integrating theme within and across
the sciences? INTRODUCTION. Interface Focus. 2012; 2:1-3.
424. Noble D. Genes and causation. Philos Trans A Math Phys Eng Sci. 2008; 366:3001–3015.
[PubMed: 18559318]
425. Garrett PE, Kurtz SR. Clinical utility of oncofetal proteins and hormones as tumor markers. Med
Clin North Am. 1986; 70:1295-1306. [PubMed: 2431237]
426. Adinolfi M, Lessof MH. Cancer, oncogenes and oncofetal antigens. Q J Med. 1985; 54:193-204.
[PubMed: 3887457]
427. Calvo R, Drabkin HA. Embryonic genes in cancer. Ann Oncol. 2000; 11(Suppl 3):207-218.
[PubMed: 11079143]
428. Mutyal NN, Radosevich A, Tiwari AK, Stypula Y, Wali R, et al. Biological mechanisms
underlying structural changes induced by colorectal field carcinogenesis measured with low-
coherence enhanced backscattering (LEBS) spectroscopy. PloS one. 2013; 8:e57206. [PubMed:
23431406]
429. Damania D, Roy HK, Kunte D, Hurteau JA, Subramanian H, et al. Insights into the field
carcinogenesis of ovarian cancer based on the nanocytology of endocervical and endometrial
epithelial cells. Int J Cancer. 2013; 133:1143–1152. [PubMed: 23436651]
430. Backman V, Roy HK. Advances in biophotonics detection of field carcinogenesis for colon
cancer risk stratification. J Cancer. 2013; 4:251-261. [PubMed: 23459690]
431. Subramanian H, Roy HK, Pradhan P, Goldberg MJ, Muldoon J, et al. Nanoscale cellular changes
in field carcinogenesis detected by partial wave spectroscopy. Cancer Res. 2009; 69:5357–5363.
[PubMed: 19549915]
432. Kopelovich L, Henson DE, Gazdar AF, Dunn B, Srivastava S, et al. Surrogate anatomic/
functional sites for evaluating cancer risk: an extension of the field effect. Clin Cancer Res. 1999;
5:3899-3905. [PubMed: 10632318]
433. Farinella-Ferruzza N. The transformation of a tail into a limb after xenoplastic transformation.
Experientia. 1956; 12:304-305.
434. Holtfreter J. Transformation of a Tail into a Limb or Gill-Like Structures. J EXP ZOOL. 1955;
129:623-648.
435. FARINELLA-FERRUZZA N. Reciprocal transplantations of tail bud between Discoglossus and
Triton. Riv Biol. 1953; 45:523-557. [PubMed: 13156363]
436. Egeblad M, Nakasone ES, Werb Z. Tumors as organs: complex tissues that interface with the
entire organism. Dev Cell. 2010; 18:884–901. [PubMed: 20627072]
437. Vincent M. Cancer: a de-repression of a default survival program common to all cells?: a life-
history perspective on the nature of cancer. Bioessays. 2012; 34:72-82. [PubMed: 22105565]
438. Dean M. Cancer as a complex developmental disorder--nineteenth Cornelius P. Rhoads Memorial
Award Lecture. Cancer Res. 1998; 58:5633–5636. [PubMed: 9865711]
439. Chabner BA, Roberts TG Jr. Timeline: Chemotherapy and the war on cancer. Nat Rev Cancer.
2005; 5:65-72. [PubMed: 15630416]
440. Nooter K, Herweijer H. Multidrug resistance (mdr) genes in human cancer. Br J Cancer. 1991;
63:663-669. [PubMed: 1674875]
441. Krishna R, Mayer LD. Multidrug resistance (MDR) in cancer. Mechanisms, reversal using
modulators of MDR and the role of MDR modulators in influencing the pharmacokinetics of
anticancer drugs. Eur J Pharm Sci. 2000; 11:265-283. [PubMed: 11033070]
442. Shah NP, Skaggs BJ, Branford S, Hughes TP, Nicoll JM, et al. Sequential ABL kinase inhibitor
therapy selects for compound drug-resistant BCR-ABL mutations with altered oncogenic
potency. J Clin Invest. 2007; 117:2562–2569. [PubMed: 17710227]
443. Deisboeck TS, Berens ME, Kansal AR, Torquato S, Stemmer-Rachamimov AO, et al. Pattern of
self-organization in tumour systems: complex growth dynamics in a novel brain tumour spheroid
model. Cell Prolif. 2001; 34:115-134. [PubMed: 11348426]
444. Rosen, R. Anticipatory systems: philosophical, mathematical, and methodological foundations.
Pergamon Press; 1985.
445. Bertschinger N, Olbrich E, Ay N, Jost J. Autonomy: an information theoretic perspective.
Biosystems. 2008; 91:331-345. [PubMed: 17897774]
446. Olsen ML, Sontheimer H. Mislocalization of Kir channels in malignant glia. Glia. 2004; 46:63-
73. [PubMed: 14999814]
447. Axelrod R, Axelrod DE, Pienta KJ. Evolution of cooperation among tumor cells. Proc Natl Acad
Sci USA. 2006; 103:13474–13479. [PubMed: 16938860]
448. Bidard FC, Pierga JY, Vincent-Salomon A, Poupon MF. A "class action" against the
microenvironment: do cancer cells cooperate in metastasis? Cancer Metastasis Rev. 2008; 27:5-
10. [PubMed: 18066649]
449. Guthrie PB, Lee RE, Rehder V, Schmidt MF, Kater SB. Self-recognition: a constraint on the
formation of electrical coupling in neurons. J Neurosci. 1994; 14:1477-1485. [PubMed:
8126549]
450. Firme CP 3rd, Natan RG, Yazdani N, Macagno ER, Baker MW. Ectopic expression of select
innexins in individual central neurons couples them to pre-existing neuronal or glial networks
that express the same innexin. J Neurosci. 2012; 32:14265-14270. [PubMed: 23055495]
451. McCusker C, Gardiner DM. The axolotl model for regeneration and aging research: a mini-
review. Gerontology. 2011; 57:565–571. [PubMed: 21372551]
452. Maden M. Axolotl/newt. Methods Mol Biol. 2008; 461:467-480. [PubMed: 19030817]
453. Lobo D, Malone TJ, Levin M. Towards a bioinformatics of patterning: a computational approach
to understanding regulative morphogenesis. Biol Open. 2013; 2:156–169. [PubMed: 23429669]
454. Barkai N, Ben-Zvi D. 'Big frog, small frog'--maintaining proportions in embryonic development:
delivered on 2 July 2008 at the 33rd FEBS Congress in Athens, Greece. FEBS J. 2009;
276:1196-1207. [PubMed: 19175672]
455. Slack JM. A serial threshold theory of regeneration. J Theor Biol. 1980; 82:105–140. [PubMed:
7401653]
456. Koni PA, Khanna R, Chang MC, Tang MD, Kaczmarek LK, et al. Compensatory anion currents
in Kv1.3 channel-deficient thymocytes. J Biol Chem. 2003; 278:39443-39451. [PubMed:
12878608]
457. Fenno L, Yizhar O, Deisseroth K. The development and application of optogenetics. Annu Rev
Neurosci. 2011; 34:389-412. [PubMed: 21692661]
458. Adams DS, Tseng AS, Levin M. Light-activation of the Archaerhodopsin H(+)-pump reverses
age-dependent loss of vertebrate regeneration: sparking system-level controls in vivo. Biol Open.
2013; 2:306-313. [PubMed: 23519324]
459. Levin M. The wisdom of the body: future techniques and approaches to morphogenetic fields in
regenerative medicine, developmental biology and cancer. Regen Med. 2011; 6:667–673.
[PubMed: 22050517]
460. Auletta G, Ellis GF, Jaeger L. Top-down causation by information control: from a philosophical
problem to a scientific research programme. J R Soc Interface. 2008; 5:1159–1172. [PubMed:
18319208]
461. Juarrero A. Top-Down Causation and Autonomy in Complex Systems. Underst Complex Syst.
2009:83-102.
462. Soto AM, Sonnenschein C, Miquel PA. On physicalism and downward causation in
developmental and cancer biology. Acta Biotheor. 2008; 56:257–274. [PubMed: 18542843]
463. Davies PC, Demetrius L, Tuszynski JA. Cancer as a dynamical phase transition. Theor Biol Med
Model. 2011; 8:30. [PubMed: 21867509]
464. Davies PC. The epigenome and top-down causation. Interface Focus. 2012; 2:42–48. [PubMed:
22419988]
465. Levin M. Molecular bioelectricity in developmental biology: new tools and recent discoveries:
control of cell behavior and pattern formation by transmembrane potential gradients. Bioessays.
2012; 34:205-217. [PubMed: 22237730]
466. Gurwitsch AG. A Biological Field Theory. 1944
467. Sachdeva G, Kalyanasundaram K, Krishnan J, Chakravarthy VS. Bistable dynamics of cardiac
cell models coupled by dynamic gap junctions linked to cardiac memory. Biol Cybern. 2010;
102:109-121. [PubMed: 20012545]
468. Gallaher J, Bier M, van Heukelom JS. First order phase transition and hysteresis in a cell's
maintenance of the membrane potential--An essential role for the inward potassium rectifiers.
Biosystems. 2010; 101:149–155. [PubMed: 20566338]
469. Gorostiza P, Volgraf M, Numano R, Szobota S, Trauner D, et al. Mechanisms of photoswitch
conjugation and light activation of an ionotropic glutamate receptor. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA.
2007; 104:10865–10870. [PubMed: 17578923]
470. Moser EI, Kropff E, Moser MB. Place cells, grid cells, and the brain's spatial representation
system. Annu Rev Neurosci. 2008; 31:69–89. [PubMed: 18284371]
471. Hafting T, Fyhn M, Bonnevie T, Moser MB, Moser EI. Hippocampus-independent phase
precession in entorhinal grid cells. Nature. 2008; 453:1248–1252. [PubMed: 18480753]
472. Grossberg, S. Progress in Theoretical Biology. Academic Press; New York: 1978.
473. Pulver SR, Griffith LC. Spike integration and cellular memory in a rhythmic network from Na
+/K+ pump current dynamics. Nat Neurosci. 2010; 13:53–59. [PubMed: 19966842]
474. Daoudal G, Debanne D. Long-term plasticity of intrinsic excitability: learning rules and
mechanisms. Learn Mem. 2003; 10:456-465. [PubMed: 14657257]
475. Debanne D, Daoudal G, Sourdet V, Russier M. Brain plasticity and ion channels. J Physiol Paris.
2003; 97:403-414. [PubMed: 15242652]
476. Krishnan J, Sachdeva G, Chakravarthy VS, Radhakrishnan S. Interpreting voltage-sensitivity of
gap junctions as a mechanism of cardiac memory. Math Biosci. 2008; 212:132–148. [PubMed:
18316101]
477. Connors BW, Long MA. Electrical synapses in the mammalian brain. Annu Rev Neurosci. 2004;
27:393-418. [PubMed: 15217338]
478. Bennett MV. Gap junctions as electrical synapses. J Neurocytol. 1997; 26:349-366. [PubMed:
9278865]
479. Buznikov GA, Shmukler YB. Possible role of "prenervous” neurotransmitters in cellular
interactions of early embryogenesis: a hypothesis. Neurochem Res. 1981; 6:55–68. [PubMed:
6111760]
480. Teh JL, Chen S. Glutamatergic signaling in cellular transformation. Pigment Cell Melanoma Res.
2012; 25:331-342. [PubMed: 22273393]
481. Martino JJ, Wall BA, Mastrantoni E, Wilimczyk BJ, La Cava SN, et al. Metabotropic glutamate
receptor 1 (Grm1) is an oncogene in epithelial cells. Oncogene. 2013; 32:4366–4376. [PubMed:
23085756]
482. Schiffner S, Chen S, Becker JC, Bosserhoff AK. Highly pigmented Tg(Grm1) mouse melanoma
develops non-pigmented melanoma cells in distant metastases. Exp Dermatol. 2012; 21:786–788.
[PubMed: 22882420]
483. Bagot RC, Zhang TY, Wen X, Nguyen TT, Nguyen HB, et al. Variations in postnatal maternal
care and the epigenetic regulation of metabotropic glutamate receptor 1 expression and
hippocampal function in the rat. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2012; 109(Suppl 2):17200–17207.
[PubMed: 23045678]
484. Conquet F, Bashir ZI, Davies CH, Daniel H, Ferraguti F, et al. Motor deficit and impairment of
synaptic plasticity in mice lacking mGluR1. Nature. 1994; 372:237-243. [PubMed: 7969468]
485. Vicaut E, Laemmel E, Stücker O. Impact of serotonin on tumour growth. Ann Med. 2000;
32:187-194. [PubMed: 10821326]
486. Dizeyi N, Bjartell A, Nilsson E, Hansson J, Gadaleanu V, et al. Expression of serotonin receptors
and role of serotonin in human prostate cancer tissue and cell lines. Prostate. 2004; 59:328–336.
[PubMed: 15042609]
487. Pai VP, Marshall AM, Hernandez LL, Buckley AR, Horseman ND. Altered serotonin physiology
in human breast cancers favors paradoxical growth and cell survival. Breast Cancer Res. 2009;
11:R81. [PubMed: 19903352]
488. Yang M, Brackenbury WJ. Membrane potential and cancer progression. Front Physiol. 2013;
4:185. [PubMed: 23882223]
489. Reid B, Song B, McCaig CD, Zhao M. Wound healing in rat cornea: the role of electric currents.
FASEB J. 2005; 19:379-386. [PubMed: 15746181]
490. Lange CS, Steele VE. The mechanism of anterior-posterior polarity control in planarians.
Differentiation. 1978; 11:1-12. [PubMed: 680426]
491. Burr HS, Hovland CI. Bio-Electric Correlates of Development in Amblystoma. Yale J Biol Med.
1937; 9:540-549. [PubMed: 21433741]
492. Yamashita M. Fluctuations in nuclear envelope's potential mediate synchronization of early
neural activity. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2011; 406:107-111. [PubMed: 21296053]

Chernet and Levin
Page 45
470. Moser EI, Kropff E, Moser MB. Place cells, grid cells, and the brain's spatial representation
system. Annu Rev Neurosci. 2008; 31:69–89. [PubMed: 18284371]
471. Hafting T, Fyhn M, Bonnevie T, Moser MB, Moser EI. Hippocampus-independent phase
precession in entorhinal grid cells. Nature. 2008; 453:1248–1252. [PubMed: 18480753]
472. Grossberg, S. Progress in Theoretical Biology. Academic Press; New York: 1978.
473. Pulver SR, Griffith LC. Spike integration and cellular memory in a rhythmic network from Na
+/K+ pump current dynamics. Nat Neurosci. 2010; 13:53–59. [PubMed: 19966842]
474. Daoudal G, Debanne D. Long-term plasticity of intrinsic excitability: learning rules and
mechanisms. Learn Mem. 2003; 10:456-465. [PubMed: 14657257]
475. Debanne D, Daoudal G, Sourdet V, Russier M. Brain plasticity and ion channels. J Physiol Paris.
2003; 97:403-414. [PubMed: 15242652]
476. Krishnan J, Sachdeva G, Chakravarthy VS, Radhakrishnan S. Interpreting voltage-sensitivity of
gap junctions as a mechanism of cardiac memory. Math Biosci. 2008; 212:132–148. [PubMed:
18316101]
477. Connors BW, Long MA. Electrical synapses in the mammalian brain. Annu Rev Neurosci. 2004;
27:393-418. [PubMed: 15217338]
478. Bennett MV. Gap junctions as electrical synapses. J Neurocytol. 1997; 26:349-366. [PubMed:
9278865]
479. Buznikov GA, Shmukler YB. Possible role of "prenervous” neurotransmitters in cellular
interactions of early embryogenesis: a hypothesis. Neurochem Res. 1981; 6:55–68. [PubMed:
6111760]
480. Teh JL, Chen S. Glutamatergic signaling in cellular transformation. Pigment Cell Melanoma Res.
2012; 25:331-342. [PubMed: 22273393]
481. Martino JJ, Wall BA, Mastrantoni E, Wilimczyk BJ, La Cava SN, et al. Metabotropic glutamate
receptor 1 (Grm1) is an oncogene in epithelial cells. Oncogene. 2013; 32:4366–4376. [PubMed:
23085756]
482. Schiffner S, Chen S, Becker JC, Bosserhoff AK. Highly pigmented Tg(Grm1) mouse melanoma
develops non-pigmented melanoma cells in distant metastases. Exp Dermatol. 2012; 21:786–788.
[PubMed: 22882420]
483. Bagot RC, Zhang TY, Wen X, Nguyen TT, Nguyen HB, et al. Variations in postnatal maternal
care and the epigenetic regulation of metabotropic glutamate receptor 1 expression and
hippocampal function in the rat. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2012; 109(Suppl 2):17200–17207.
[PubMed: 23045678]
484. Conquet F, Bashir ZI, Davies CH, Daniel H, Ferraguti F, et al. Motor deficit and impairment of
synaptic plasticity in mice lacking mGluR1. Nature. 1994; 372:237-243. [PubMed: 7969468]
485. Vicaut E, Laemmel E, Stücker O. Impact of serotonin on tumour growth. Ann Med. 2000;
32:187-194. [PubMed: 10821326]
486. Dizeyi N, Bjartell A, Nilsson E, Hansson J, Gadaleanu V, et al. Expression of serotonin receptors
and role of serotonin in human prostate cancer tissue and cell lines. Prostate. 2004; 59:328–336.
[PubMed: 15042609]
487. Pai VP, Marshall AM, Hernandez LL, Buckley AR, Horseman ND. Altered serotonin physiology
in human breast cancers favors paradoxical growth and cell survival. Breast Cancer Res. 2009;
11:R81. [PubMed: 19903352]
488. Yang M, Brackenbury WJ. Membrane potential and cancer progression. Front Physiol. 2013;
4:185. [PubMed: 23882223]
489. Reid B, Song B, McCaig CD, Zhao M. Wound healing in rat cornea: the role of electric currents.
FASEB J. 2005; 19:379-386. [PubMed: 15746181]
490. Lange CS, Steele VE. The mechanism of anterior-posterior polarity control in planarians.
Differentiation. 1978; 11:1-12. [PubMed: 680426]
491. Burr HS, Hovland CI. Bio-Electric Correlates of Development in Amblystoma. Yale J Biol Med.
1937; 9:540-549. [PubMed: 21433741]
492. Yamashita M. Fluctuations in nuclear envelope's potential mediate synchronization of early
neural activity. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2011; 406:107-111. [PubMed: 21296053]

Page 46
493. Mazzanti M, Bustamante JO, Oberleithner H. Electrical dimension of the nuclear envelope.
Physiol Rev. 2001; 81:1–19. [PubMed: 11152752]
494. Onkal R, Djamgoz MB. Molecular pharmacology of voltage-gated sodium channel expression in
metastatic disease: clinical potential of neonatal Nav1.5 in breast cancer. Eur J Pharmacol. 2009;
625:206-219. [PubMed: 19835862]
495. Saito T, Schlegel R, Andresson T, Yuge L, Yamamoto M, et al. Induction of cell transformation
by mutated 16K vacuolar H+-atpase (ductin) is accompanied by down-regulation of gap
junctional intercellular communication and translocation of connexin 43 in NIH3T3 cells.
Oncogene. 1998; 17:1673–1680. [PubMed: 9796696]
496. Gupta N, Martin PM, Prasad PD, Ganapathy V. SLC5A8 (SMCT1)-mediated transport of
butyrate forms the basis for the tumor suppressive function of the transporter. Life Sci. 2006;
78:2419-2425. [PubMed: 16375929]
497. Roepke TK, Purtell K, King EC, La Perle KM, Lerner DJ, et al. Targeted deletion of Kcne2
causes gastritis cystica profunda and gastric neoplasia. PLoS One. 2010; 5:e11451. [PubMed:
20625512]
498. House CD, Vaske CJ, Schwartz AM, Obias V, Frank B, et al. Voltage-gated Na+ channel SCN5A
is 'a key regulator of a gene transcriptional network that controls colon cancer invasion. Cancer
Res. 2010; 70:6957–6967. [PubMed: 20651255]
499. Song Z, He CD, Liu J, Sun C, Lu P, et al. Blocking glutamate-mediated signalling inhibits human
melanoma growth and migration. Exp Dermatol. 2012; 21:926–931. [PubMed: 23171453]


Page 48
[PAGE 47] Figure 1. Bioelectric cues in vivo
(A) Resting potential gradients in all cells result from the imbalance of ion movement across
cell membranes. The resulting Vmem is a function of the internal and external concentrations
of the major ion species, as well as the conductivity to each ion (open/closed states of
specific ion channel proteins).
(B) At the level of tissues, trans-epithelial potentials (TEPs) result from ion flows across
sheets of cells connected by tight junctions [493–494]. Breaks in epithelia provide electric
fields that serve as migratory cues for galvanotaxis of cells involved in wound healing and
metastasis.
(C) At a yet greater level of biological organization, spatial gradients of Vmem and TEP
correlate with whole body organs or primary anatomical axes[113,495,496], providing
patterning cues such as positional information that guide growth and form.
(D) Still mysterious with respect to their function in patterning are the gradients across
intracellular membranes, such as the nuclear envelope potential [497–498]. The role of such
gradients for active targeting and distribution of intracellular components or conformation/
transcriptional status of components of the DNA in the nucleus remain to be analyzed.

[PAGE 48] Figure 2. Molecular genetics implicates ion translocators in cancer
(A) The Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) database consists of high-throughput functional
genomic data on collections of biologically and statistically comparable samples. A profile
generated from the cutaneous malignant melanoma dataset readily reveals changes of
transcription of many ion channel genes during neoplastic progression; here is shown the
down-regulation of a specific sodium channel at the transition from benign nevi to malignant
melanoma.
(B) The amount of published data on ion channels is growing more voluminous every year.
Importantly, the current level of interest in oncochannels as genetic and pharmacological
targets is a significant underestimate of their true importance, since current studies take
place almost exclusively at the levels of mRNA or protein profiling. Since channels do most
of their regulation post-translationally (being opened or closed by a range of local and non-
cell-autonomous signals), analyses such as profiling, microarray, deep sequencing, knockout
screens, etc. inevitably miss all of the regulation that takes place at the level of physiology.
(C) Oncomine is a cancer profiling database consisting of genes, pathways, and networks
deregulated in more than 50,000 cancer gene expression profiles. Analysis of genes with
highly altered expression levels (fold change compared to relevant normal tissue in the top
10 percentile) in multiple cancer types implicates several chloride, potassium, and sodium
channels as oncogenes.


Page 49
[PAGE 49] Figure 3. Transmembrane potential as a diagnostic modality for tumor detection
(A, closeup in A') Tumors (red arrow) can be induced in vivo in tractable model systems
such as Xenopus larvae using targeted misexpression of mammalian oncogenes such as
dnP53, Rel3, Gli1, RAS, etc.).
(B) Using voltage-sensitive fluorescent dyes, areas of depolarization (green, red) are
detected non-invasively [93,281]. While a tightly-defined physiological signature remains to
be developed (likely necessitating concomitant use of several different physiological dyes,
such as those reporting voltage, sodium content, and pH), the scanning of bioelectric
properties with light-emitting dyes in vivo is a promising modality for early detection of pre-
cancerous tissue and tumor margins during surgery.

[PAGE 49] Figure 3. Transmembrane potential as a diagnostic modality for tumor detection
(A, closeup in A') Tumors (red arrow) can be induced in vivo in tractable model systems
such as Xenopus larvae using targeted misexpression of mammalian oncogenes such as
dnP53, Rel3, Gli1, RAS, etc.).
(B) Using voltage-sensitive fluorescent dyes, areas of depolarization (green, red) are
detected non-invasively [93,281]. While a tightly-defined physiological signature remains to
be developed (likely necessitating concomitant use of several different physiological dyes,
such as those reporting voltage, sodium content, and pH), the scanning of bioelectric
properties with light-emitting dyes in vivo is a promising modality for early detection of pre-
cancerous tissue and tumor margins during surgery.

[PAGE 50] Figure 4. Experimental control of Vmem in a defined cell subpopulation
(A) In Xenopus, a sparse but ubiquitous population of cells expresses the Glycine-gated
chloride channel (GlyR or GlyCl) [60]. Here a section of a frog larva has been subjected to
immunohistochemistry revealing these cells as purple dots (red arrows).
(B) A strategy for selective depolarization of these cells in vivo uses a specific channel
opener, ivermectin, to render these cells permeable to chloride. Then the level of chloride in
surrounding medium is varied, to induce depolarization (efflux of negative Cl¯ ions) or
hyperpolarization (influx of negative chloride ions) at will. This technique allows the
experimenter to study the effects of Vmem change in a specific cell population within a
living organism.

[PAGE 51] Figure 5. Instructor cell depolarization induces metastatic phenotype
When the GlyR-expressing cells are depolarized, a remarkable phenotype is observed
among melanocytes – pigment cell derivatives of the neural crest [60–61]. Panels A-F
shows cross sections of tadpoles.
(A, B) in control sections across the anterior and posterior trunk, small numbers of normal
round melanocytes are observed (nt = neural tube). In contrast (C,D), animals in which the
instructor cells have been depolarized show high numbers of highly arborized melanocytes.
In fact these melanocytes not only become much more dendritic and overproliferate, but also
thoroughly invade soft body tissues such as the neural tube and its lumen (E, red arrows) and
form long nerve-like projections across the entire somatic mesoderm (F). These cells
preferentially target the blood vessels (H, red arrows, compares to G).
Not only melanocytes are affected: blood vessels (visualized in a transgenic animal in which
all flk1-positive cells express GFP) also lose their normal patterned organization and grow
ectopically (blue arrows, compare J to I) [281]. When depolarized using any method
(whether relying on chloride or another ion), the instructor cells activate a metastatic-like
program of behavior in several target cell types, without the involvement of genetic damage
or the presence of canonical oncogenes.


[PAGE 52] Figure 6. Instructor cells manipulate cell behavior using serotonin
(A) The cells that overproliferate, change shape, and migrate inappropriately (brown
melanocytes, red arrow) are not the same cells that are depolarized (blue lineage label,
showing the location of a depolarizing channel's misexpression in this section of a tadpole)
[60,61]. Indeed, the effect takes place at considerable distance and recent studies showed
that a very few depolarized cells at one end of a Xenopus larva is sufficient to induce the
metastatic behavior of melanocytes at the far end of the animal [281].
(B) The non-cell-autonomous transformation of melanocyte behavior is mediated by a non-
neural function of the neurotransmitter serotonin, and can be completely rescued by
fluoxetine - the blocker of SERT (the 5HT transporter). A current model of these events is
that an instructor cell, when depolarized (causing SERT to run backwards instead of
performing serotonin reuptake), begins to secrete serotonin. Serotonin itself can induce the
same hyperpigmented phenotype, turning on genes like Slug and Sox10.
(C) The induction of metastatic behavior by voltage change forms a paradigm case for
understanding bioelectric events in cancer. In this case, all of the key points are known: the
endogenous channel regulating Vmem, the physiological parameter that is necessary and
sufficient for activating the effect (depolarization, no matter which ion species is used), the
transduction mechanism that converts biophysical property into movement of a small
molecule chemical signal (SERT), the receptor machinery (5HT-R1,2,5 and cAMP) and key

[PAGE 53] transcriptional downstream responses, and the cell behaviors regulated by these downstream
events.

transcriptional downstream responses, and the cell behaviors regulated by these downstream
events.

[PAGE 54] Figure 7. Vmem as a regulator of oncogene-mediated tumorigenesis
(A) When an oncogene (Xrel3) fused with a red fluorescent tag (tdTomato) is injected into a
frog embryo, the larvae develop fluorescently-labeled tumors. Remarkably, when a
hyperpolarizing channel mRNA is co-injected with the oncogene (B), the incidence of
tumors is significantly reduced (C). The ability of a hyperpolarized state to suppress
tumorigenesis despite the strong presence of oncogene protein (dashed circle in panel B-ii)
reveals the functional importance of the depolarized state acquired by prospective tumor
cells, and shows that at least in some contexts, cancer can be suppressed by physiological
signals despite the presence of a genetic component normally sufficient to induce a tumor
[93].


[PAGE 55] Figure 8. SLC5A8, Butyrate, and HDAC mediate tumor suppression by hyperpolarization
The current model of how Vmem regulates ability of cells to form tumors is as follows [93].
(A) In unperturbed embryos, polarized Vmem is generated and maintained by several ion
channels and pumps present in the plasma membrane; this condition allows moderate
amounts of butyrate to influx through SLC5A8 and inhibits histone deacetylases (HDACs).
This epigenetically regulates transcription machinery thereby maintaining baseline level
proliferation and differentiation compatible with normal somatic morphostasis.
(B) Expression of oncogenes, or other physiological events (e.g., non-genetically induced
depolarization, as described in [60–61]), results in the inability of SLC5A8 to import
butyrate. Higher HDAC activity then leads to overproliferation and other neoplastic changes
leading to appearance of tumor structures.
(C) The effect can be blocked by forced hyperpolarization via molecular and/or
pharmacological targeting of H+, K+, or Cl® ion translocators. Forced hyperpolarization of
the overall transmembrane potential efficiently powers the uptake of Na⁺ through SLC5A8.
This energetically favorable intake of Na+ drives the inward flux of butyrate through
SLC5A8. High levels of butyrate continually block HDAC, which leads to hyperacetylation
of important genes resulting in cell cycle arrest and suppression of tumor formation.

[PAGE 56] (D) The bioelectric pathway is similar to that of the depolarization-induced metastasis
(Figure 7C), except that the transduction mechanism involves SLC5A8 and butyrate (instead
of SERT and serotonin), and initially regulates a chromatin modification enzyme (HDAC)
upstream of transcriptional changes that lead to tumor formation.

[PAGE 57] Figure 9. Cancer as a disease of geometry
(A) Within any organism, substructures are provided with a field of instructive information
that continually orchestrates individual cell activities into large-scale anatomical target
morphologies [14,15]. These signals are mediated by gradients of chemical factors,
pressures/tensions, extracellular matrix components, and bioelectrical events. This
morphogenetic field operates during embryogenesis and regenerative repair, as well as
maintains the organism for decades against aging, and disorders of cell: field interaction
manifest as cancer.
(B) When half of a tumor is removed during a limb amputation in regenerative organisms
such as salamanders, remaining tumor tissue is normalized and participates in the formation
of a healthy limb [397,398,400]. The ability of embryonic and regenerative contexts to
reprogram cancer cells towards correct anatomy reinforces the idea that cancer is a disease
of organization and cell:cell communication, and suggests normalization strategies as
alternatives to biomedical paradigm of mandatory killing of permanently damaged
(malignant) cells.

[PAGE 57] Figure 9. Cancer as a disease of geometry
(A) Within any organism, substructures are provided with a field of instructive information that continually orchestrates individual cell activities into large-scale anatomical target morphologies [14,15]. These signals are mediated by gradients of chemical factors, pressures/tensions, extracellular matrix components, and bioelectrical events. This morphogenetic field operates during embryogenesis and regenerative repair, as well as maintains the organism for decades against aging, and disorders of cell: field interaction manifest as cancer.
(B) When half of a tumor is removed during a limb amputation in regenerative organisms such as salamanders, remaining tumor tissue is normalized and participates in the formation of a healthy limb [397,398,400]. The ability of embryonic and regenerative contexts to reprogram cancer cells towards correct anatomy reinforces the idea that cancer is a disease of organization and cell:cell communication, and suggests normalization strategies as alternatives to biomedical paradigm of mandatory killing of permanently damaged (malignant) cells.

[PAGE 58] Figure 10. Bioelectric control of growth and form overrides genetic information
The interplay of physiological and genetic information represents a key area for future research in the cancer field, as well as developmental and regenerative biology. Recent work on the bioelectric control of stem cell-mediated regeneration in planaria illustrates one example in which information stored in bioelectrical states dominates the genetically-encoded tissue pattern [113,115].
(A) An intact worm is cut into 3 pieces, and the middle fragment is subjected to transient pharmacological gap junctional inhibition [112,114]. This isolation of the wound cells from long-range signals throughout the fragment result in a 2-headed worm (B). Remarkably, when these worms are cut again (C) and again (D), without any further manipulation, the 2-headed phenotype persists (indefinitely). The ability of a brief perturbation of physiological signaling to permanently change the target morphology (the shape to which the animal regenerates upon damage) despite an undamaged genome hints at the power of bioelectrically-encoded signals to regulate cell behavior toward specific tissue outcomes. Note that this target morphology is specified non-locally and cannot be explained by a

[PAGE 59] 
simple epigenetic modification of wound tissue, because the tail cells that would have been epigenetically reprogrammed into head identity are removed on each round of cutting, and it is the normally-differentiated central trunk cells that must know to generate an ectopic head at each wound site. Such distributed storage of target morphology in the real-time bioelectrical network present throughout the organism may explain the classical data on detection of tumors by electrical readings taken far away from the actual site of the cancer, and serves to focus attention on events outside of the immediate microenvironment of a neoplastic lesion.