Aging as a Loss of Goal-Directedness:
An Evolutionary Simulation and Analysis
Unifying Regeneration with Anatomical
Rejuvenation
Léo Pio-Lopez, Benedikt Hartl, Michael Levin

Posted Date: 14 February 2025
doi: 10.20944/preprints202412.2354.v3
Keywords: aging; morphogenesis; cognition; NCA; computational modeling; in silico

Preprints.org is a free multidisciplinary platform providing preprint service
that is dedicated to making early versions of research outputs permanently
available and citable. Preprints posted at Preprints.org appear in Web of
Science, Crossref, Google Scholar, Scilit, Europe PMC.
Copyright: This open access article is published under a Creative Commons CC BY 4.0
license, which permit the free download, distribution, and reuse, provided that the author
and preprint are cited in any reuse.


[PAGE 2] Article
Aging as a Loss of Goal-Directedness: An Evolutionary
Simulation and Analysis Unifying Regeneration with
Anatomical Rejuvenation
Léo Pio-Lopez 1,†, Benedikt Hartl 1,2,† and Michael Levin 1,3,*

Abstract: Aging is an extensive biological process characterized by morphological and functional alterations in cellular and extracellular components, resulting in a systematic decline in biological functions ultimately leading to death. Although substantial advancements have been made in manipulating lifespan in model organisms like C. elegans and mice through genetic, dietary, and pharmacological means, the fundamental mechanisms driving aging in humans remain elusive and widely debated. In addition, there is no comprehensive computational platform capable of making predictions on aging in multicellular systems and integrating the multiscale competency of lifeforms. We focus on the processes that build and maintain a complex anatomy toward a specific target morphology, and propose the hypothesis that aging arises even in the absence of accumulated cellular or genetic damage, because a homeodynamic system left without any goal in anatomical morphospace will start degrading. This can occur in biological systems because evolution typically prioritizes development over morphostasis, leaving organisms with limited reinforcement of anatomical goals after development. Using an in silico model of homeostatic morphogenesis with a multiscale competency architecture and information dynamics analysis, we find: (1) Absence of Long-Term Morphostasis: Aging emerges naturally after development due to the lack of an evolved regenerative goal, rather than just specific detrimental properties of developmental programs (e.g., antagonistic pleiotropy or hyperfunction); (2) Acceleration Factors vs. Root Cause: Cellular misdifferentiation, reduced competency, communication failures, and genetic damage all accelerate aging but are not its primary cause; (3) Information Dynamics in Aging: Aging correlates with increased active information storage and transfer entropy, while spatial entropy measures distinguish two dynamics—loss of structure and morphological noise accumulation; (4) Dormant Regenerative Potential: Despite organ loss, spatial information persists in the cybernetic tissue, indicating a memory of lost structures, which can be reactivated for organ restoration through targeted regenerative information; and (5) Optimized Regeneration Strategies: Restoration is most efficient when regenerative information includes differential patterns of affected cells and their neighboring tissue, highlighting strategies for rejuvenation. These findings provide a novel perspective on aging dynamics with significant implications for longevity research and regenerative medicine.

Keywords: aging; morphogenesis; cognition; computational modeling; in silico

[PAGE 3] INTRODUCTION
1.1. Theories of Aging
Aging is a system-level, near-ubiquitous biological process characterized by morphological and functional alterations in cellular and extracellular components, resulting in a systematic decline in biological functions [1]. This degenerative process is modulated by genetics, lifestyle, and environmental factors [2]. As cellular functionality diminishes with age, there is a corresponding decrease in physiological capacities and an enhanced vulnerability to a spectrum of diseases, including cardiovascular disorders, cancer, neurodegenerative diseases, type II diabetes, and various infections. These conditions collectively compromise the quality of human life [2,3]. Figure 1 (A) schematically illustrates the typical life cycle of a complex organism comprising various stages from embryogenesis through maturity, decline, aging, and eventual death.

Several theories have been proposed to explain the aging process, that we can classify into damage-based and programmatic theories [1,4,5], with the former being more extensively studied [1,3,6,7]. Damage-based theories assert that aging results from the accumulation of molecular damage, impacting crucial cellular components like the genome, telomeres, mitochondria, and proteins, driven by imperfect repair mechanisms [6-8]. Conversely, programmatic theories suggest that aging is genetically predetermined, or quasi-programmed and encoded within the genome, not merely due to stochastic accumulation of damage [9-11]. Here, we formulate and computationally simulate a fundamentally different hypothesis based on the nature of morphogenesis as a homeodynamic system working toward anatomical setpoints: that aging is the result of a proto-cognitive disfunction among the cellular collective, and does not require damage, or evolved antagonistic mechanisms in order to occur. Instead, we propose that, as observed in animal behavior [12], cellular living systems without goals to pursue tend to degrade. Our hypothesis is that aging is the result of intrinsic dynamics of complex cybernetic (goal-directed) systems, not caused by external noise or damage. Nevertheless, it is consistent with other theories of aging [13,14] which propose additional dynamics that can lead to loss of setpoints of anatomical homeostasis, and can be accelerated by various kinds of damage.

[PAGE 4] Antagonistic pleiotropy posits that certain genes have beneficial effects in early life but detrimental effects in later life. These genes confer advantages such as increased fertility and resilience in youth, which are critical for survival and reproduction. However, as an individual ages, the same genes contribute to aging and decline because their negative effects accumulate. The theory suggests that natural selection favors these genes because of their early-life benefits, despite their harmful subsequent impacts. This results in a trade-off between early benefits and later costs [15]. Another related idea is the hyperfunction theory, which suggests that aging is not primarily a result of accumulating molecular damage or genetic programming, but rather due to a continuous and excessive operation of cellular growth processes that were beneficial during the earlier stages of life [13,14]. Central to this theory is the role of the Target of Rapamycin (TOR) pathway, which is a major regulator of growth and metabolism in cells. During the growth phase of an organism's life, the TOR pathway promotes cellular and organismal growth by driving processes like protein synthesis, nutrient uptake, and cell division. These functions are vital for development and reproductive success. However, aging arises when these growth-promoting activities are not appropriately down-regulated after the organism has passed its reproductive prime. Instead of adjusting to a maintenance mode that would be more suitable for the non-reproductive phase of life, the TOR pathway continues to stimulate cellular processes actively. This ongoing activity can lead to "hyperfunction", where cellular components and systems are overstimulated [13,14]. It is not clear, in that scenario, why the efficient processes of morphological homeostasis [16,17] do not orchestrate these active processes toward upkeep of functional anatomy (c.f., Figure 1 (B,C)).

Our approach is consistent with the antagonistic pleiotropy and hyperfunction models in that we also propose that fundamental morphogenetic processes are involved in aging. However, we do not focus on specific genes with early vs. late roles, but on the role that large-scale morphogenetic plasticity plays in establishing and maintaining bodies and the possible disorders of such cybernetic (goal-driven) processes. We and others have emphasized the indirect link [18-20] between genotype and phenotype: not just complexity and pleiotropy, but the fact that the morphogenetic layer has active homeodynamic capabilities that enable collections of cells to be aligned with respect to setpoints in the space of anatomical possibilities [16,21,22] (c.f., Figure 1 (B,C)). Living materials must navigate the space of possible organ and tissue arrangements as needed, starting from diverse initial states: single cells (egg-based development), a different body (in the case of metamorphosis), or a damaged body (in the case of regeneration). In all of these cases, drastic growth and remodeling must occur while failing or no longer needed sub-components must be replaced on-the-fly. This process has been described as a collective intelligence [23,24], because of its problem-solving capacities; like other advanced intelligences, it will be subject to specific failure modes whose origin is not organic disease or damage, but the informational dead end of completing one's mission and not having a new setpoint toward which to strive.

[PAGE 5] We formulate, and simulate the consequences of, the hypothesis that the aging phenotype results from morphogenetic processes ceasing their targeted navigation of anatomical morphospace, after development is completed. But adulthood, and the rigors of daily life, are precisely when these processes are needed, in the context of stress, degeneration, and cell replacement, to maintain the Ship of Theseus that is the body. What will bind the cellular components of a body toward common paths in anatomical space after their goals have been reached and the body built? Tissue renewal will continue locally, for a time, but the thing that bound individual cells into a coherent "embryo"—a commitment to a specific navigation path in anatomical space—disappears at the global scale. Damage-based theories of aging are thus hypothesized to be secondary: they induce aging to the extent that they rob cells of clear and consistent anatomical and histological setpoints for which to aim. But the primary new proposal here is that complex goal-driven systems can experience a kind of intrinsic disorganization after they have met their goal. In the absence of strong effort toward targets in morphospace, the cellular collective begins to disband, giving way to systemic disease states such as degeneration and cancer—the inevitable outcome of a body that increasingly becomes a group of individual cells, not a unified higher-order morphogenetic agent [25].

1.2. Knowledge Gaps
Recent research suggests a shift in our understanding of aging, proposing that it results from changes in biological information processing rather than solely from cellular and molecular damage. This concept, linked to a malfunction in the "software of life", focuses on how aging processes are governed by epigenetic changes, either bioelectrical or chromatin modifications [5,26,27]. The differing dynamics, capabilities, and failure modes of the molecular layer and the physiological computational layers have long been studied in neuroscience, but are only now beginning to be related to areas such as developmental biology and cancer [28-30]. Novel computational frameworks are needed to begin to integrate these ideas in aging and longevity research. Although substantial advancements have been made in extending lifespan in simple model organisms through genetic, dietary, and pharmacological means [2,31,32], the fundamental mechanisms driving aging in humans remain elusive and widely debated. Current life extension strategies show limited effectiveness [33]. Much of the research has adopted a bottom-up approach, focusing on the biological hardware, the cellular components such as genes, molecular pathways, and, more recently, the epigenome. However, managing aging at such a micro-level may not be practical for complex structures like human anatomy [17,34,35]. This suggests that a broader, possibly more integrated approach may be necessary in order to fully understand and effectively intervene in the aging process.

Computational modeling has proven useful in the past to help characterize dynamics guiding complex morphogenesis [36-44]. However, to the best of our knowledge, there is currently no computational model in the literature explicating the aging process as a loss of goal-directedness, or directionality within the morphogenetic control system. The field is mostly dominated by experimental approaches and focused on the mathematical and computational modeling of a specific hallmark of aging [6], network approaches to aging, or the impact of the environment on aging [45-48]. One prior study utilizes, similar to our model, a neural cellular automaton (see next section) to perform morphogenesis: with gradient-based deep learning, the self-regulatory interaction dynamics of distributed cellular agents have been optimized to grow a target morphology, fully self-orchestrated. However, without explicitly stabilizing morphogenesis by additionally training the cellular agents on regenerative tasks, anatomies kept growing uncontrollably after development. Thus, the study focused on an adversarial approach to stabilize self-orchestrated morphogenesis rather than studying aging and its causes in such a multi-cellular tissue per se [49].

Existing mathematical models have not yet captured the biological signaling dynamics in aging tissue or revealed the underlying information dynamics that drive aging and the progressive degradation of anatomy over time. Unlike previous approaches, we uniquely address this gap by developing an evolutionary framework that integrates both molecular and systemic aspects of aging within a multi-competency architecture. Our model demonstrates how cells, trained solely through evolution to execute developmental tasks, inherently lack a regenerative goal post-development. By simulating this dynamic, we reveal that aging arises from the absence of targeted navigation in anatomical morphospace after development, offering a novel perspective on the root cause of aging. Moreover, our approach uncovers the potential for dormant regenerative programs to be reactivated, enabling targeted restoration of anatomical structures (c.f., Figure 1).

1.3. Biological Architecture of the Model
Morphogenesis is the result of multicellular collectives acting together to achieve a specific endpoint within the space of anatomical possibilities [19] (see Figure 1). This process is driven by intercellular communication and information processing, where cells use different communication


[PAGE 4] 1.4. Our Computational Model
Recently [41], we quantitatively investigated in silico the influence of varying levels of cellular competency of a multi-scale competency architecture [19,50] on the evolutionary process. We utilized tools from Artificial Life [61], a field of research focused on developing computational and cybernetic models that exhibit life-like behavior based on ideas derived from biology; prominent examples are Cellular Automata [62-65] such as Conway's Game of Life [66]. Specifically, we deployed Neural Cellular Automata [67] (NCAs) as a model for evolving morphogenesis (see Figure 2 (A-C)): NCAs comprise a regular spatial grid of locally interacting cellular agents which maintain a numerical state vector that is regulated by an internal, cell-specific Artificial Neural Network (ANN). In that way, the cells of an NCA can be trained to perform a collective self-orchestrated system-level task, such as morphogenesis [39-41] or even collective navigation behavior [51,68], solely via successive perceptions of their local environment, i.e., reading neighboring cell state information, and computing corresponding actions to regulate their own states in accordance with a system-level agenda.

Thus, NCAs exhibit striking similarities with the genome- and collective intelligence-based multi-scale competency architectures of biological life [19,20,51,69]: the instructions of how to grow an organism from the bottom up is encoded in its genome, corresponding to the NCA's (functional) ANN parameters. Moreover, through subsequent localized perception-action cycles of their ANN-based unicellular agents, NCAs model the intercellular communication- and intracellular information processing pathways of the adaptive and flexible internal decision-making mechanisms of biological cells: while biological cells regulate their gene expressions via gene regulatory networks, the cells of an NCA regulate their cell types via their internal ANN, and while biological cells utilize bio-electrical and molecular cues for intercellular signaling, cells in an NCA exchange numerical state information alike. In both cases, such communication pathways are localized between neighboring cells while the collective of cells may still follow a global agenda to self-orchestrate the process of morphogenesis and thereby give rise to the anatomical form of a system-level organism. Here, we use ANNs to model the memory, decision-making, and integrated information processes operating inside of cells [70-74].

Following our previous work [41], we deploy a swarm of virtual unicellular agents on the spatial grid of an NCA. Each agent hosts a decision-making machinery modeled by an ANN (notably, identical ANNs are deployed for each cell throughout a particular NCA instance), enabling the cellular agents to perceive neighboring cell states and independently propose cell-state regulatory actions, as illustrated in Figure 2 (A, B) and detailed below. Furthermore, we utilize evolutionary algorithms (EAs) [75] to optimize the parameters of NCAs, comprising structural and functional parts [41], such that the cellular agents evolve to self-assemble a particular spatial target pattern of predefined cell states in a fixed number of developmental steps, solely based on local communication rules, see Figure 2 (C).

Similar to ref. [41], we evolve NCAs to perform morphogenesis and morphostasis tasks, here specifically of a (16 × 16) smiley-face-pattern reminiscent of the bioelectric craniofacial prepattern that establishes the rough outlines of the amphibian face during early development [76]. We deploy the evolved NCA solution for much longer times compared to the developmental stage at which the evolutionary selection occurs (c.f., Figure 2 (C, D)) and study the NCA's long-term behavior with information-dynamic measures such as Active Information Storage (AIS) [77], Transfer Entropy (TE) [78], and Spatial Entropy (SE) [79]. This parallels a biological organism's ability to maintain its physiological integrity via multiscale homeodynamic competencies for much longer than necessary for genetic reproduction. In turn, this may lead to an accumulation of a variety of entropically and self-regulatory favored morphological changes that are not directly fatal but potentially increasingly dysfunctional, changing the setpoint of the unicellular 'agents' self-regulatory scheme and leading to misdifferentiation (c.f., Figure 2 (D)).

Moreover, based on such virtual organisms, we here investigate in silico the information-dynamic implications of temporally affected competencies or information loss at the cellular level of a multi-cellular collective whose parts pursue a system-level agenda. To systematically interfere with the cellular competencies in our NCA model over time, we deploy four different strategies: We (a) increase the misdifferentiation rate of cell-state expressions, (b) reduce the cellular agent's ability to self-regulate their respective states by corrupting the reliability at which cellular actions are actually considered in the NCA's cell state updates, (c) reduce the connectivity between neighboring cells reminiscent of closing an increasing number of gap junctions (GJs) to neighbors, and (d) accumulate genetic damage to the NCA's functional parameters by randomly modifying the corresponding ANN parameters with Gaussian noise successively throughout the lifetime of our virtual organisms.

[PAGE 7] 2. Material And Methods
2.1. Neural Cellular Automaton: A Multi-Agent Model for Morphogenesis, and Aging?
Cellular Automata (CAs) were initially introduced by von Neumann to study self-replicating machines [62]. Since then, they have become widely used as simple models for Artificial Life [61]. The core concept behind CAs revolves around maintaining a discrete spatial grid of cells, each individual cell *i* being assigned a binary, numerical, or even vector-valued state cᵢ(tₖ) at every time step tₖ.

The evolution of these cell states over time follows local update rules. Specifically, we have that cᵢ(tₖ₊₁) = u(Nᵢ(tₖ)), where u(·) is a function of the current state of cell *i*, i.e., cᵢ(tₖ) = cᵢ₀(tₖ), and of the states cᵢᵥ(tₖ) of its iᵥ = i₁, ..., iₙ neighboring cells, which we collect in the matrix Nᵢ(tₖ) = (cᵢ₀(tₖ), ..., cᵢₙ(tₖ)).

Despite their typically simple and predefined update rules, CAs often exhibit complex dynamics (c.f., Conway's Game of Life [66]) and have even been employed for universal computation tasks, as in Wolfram's rule 110 [63,64].

Neural Cellular Automata (NCAs) [67] can be seen as an extension to "traditional" CAs. In this context, the local update rule is replaced with a more flexible ANN, u(·) → fΘ(·), where Θ denotes the set of trainable parameters of the ANN, fΘ(·) (see, e.g., Appendix A in Ref. [41]). By employing Machine Learning (ML) techniques, NCAs have been utilized to perform tasks such as self-orchestrated pattern formation [39], the simultaneous co-evolution of a rigid robot's morphology and controller [51], and have been proposed as a promising candidate for robust, decentralized controllers of autonomous drug delivery systems [68].

An NCA is essentially a grid of interconnected cells, each equipped with an identical ANN that is capable of perceiving the numerical states of its immediate cellular neighbors, Nᵢ(tₖ), and proposing actions, aᵢ(tₖ) = fΘ(Nᵢ(tₖ)), to regulate its own cell state, following the equation

cᵢ(tₖ₊₁) = cᵢ(tₖ) + aᵢ(tₖ) + ξc,  (1)

where we also account for possible imperfections in the cell-specific state updates via a Gaussian noise term of amplitude ξc.

Thus, the cellular agents of an NCA perceive the numerical states of their immediate, respective neighborhoods, Nᵢ(tₖ), at any given time step, tₖ, to update their own states (c.f., Figure 2 (A, B)). Importantly, we do not include any explicit signature of aging in our model, i.e., no cell-internal marker or explicit input to the cellular agents other than their self-regulated cellular states that would contain temporal information.

However, being immersed in a dynamical multi-cellular environment where every part has its own agenda, the cellular agents' state updates can also be utilized for active communicating with their neighbors, following a policy π(Nᵢ(tₖ)) ≈ fΘ(Nᵢ(tₖ)). From the perspective of Reinforcement Learning [80], an NCA can thus be considered a trainable multi-agent system that needs to utilize local communication rules to achieve a target system-level outcome.

So far, our approach is agnostic to the particular ANN architecture of the update function, fΘ(·). Closely following Ref. [41], we here briefly describe the genuine ANN architecture deployed in our cellular agents, which is schematically depicted in Figure 2 (B): Inspired by Ref. [81], we partition an NCA's cell's ANN into (i) a sensory part, εᵢᵥ = fΘ⁽ˢ⁾(cᵢᵥ(tₖ)) ∈ ℝˢ, preprocessing each neighborhood cell state separately into a respective sensor embedding, which we collect in the matrix E(Nᵢ(tₖ)) = (εᵢ₀(tₖ), ..., εᵢₙ(tₖ)). These sensor embeddings are then (ii) averaged across all neighbor embeddings into a single context vector sᵢ(tₖ) = (1/N+1) Σᵥ₌₀ εᵢᵥ(tₖ) ∈ ℝˢ. A subsequent (iii) controller ANN, fΘ⁽ᶜ⁾(·), potentially with recurrent feedback connections, eventually outputs the cell's action, aᵢ(tₖ) = fΘ(Nᵢ(tₖ)) = fΘ⁽ᶜ⁾(sᵢ(tₖ)) based on the cell-specific context vector sᵢ(tₖ). Notably, for the controller module we here utilize so-termed RGRN architectures [41] that are inspired by a combination of Recurrent ANNs (RNNs) [82] and Gene Regulatory Networks [83] (see Appendix A in Ref. [41] for details).

Analogous to Ref. [41], we model morphogenesis by employing NCAs on a two-dimensional Nₓ × Nᵧ square grid with the objective that all cells of the grid assume a cell-specific predefined target cell type, ĝᵢ, after a fixed number of tₚ developmental time steps, starting from an initial cell state configuration cᵢ(0). We assign the first Nᴳ elements, gᵢ(tₖ) = (cᵢ₁(tₖ), ..., cᵢNG(tₖ)), of an NCA's Nᶜ-dimensional cell state cᵢ(tₖ) = (cᵢ₁(tₖ), ..., cᵢNc(tₖ)) as indicators for expressing one of 1, ..., Nᴳ discrete cell types, while the remaining Nᴴ = (Nᶜ - Nᴳ) elements of the cell state represent its hidden states, hᵢ(tₖ) = (cᵢ(NC-NH)(tₖ), ..., cᵢNc(tₖ)), that can be utilized by the NCA for intercellular communication. A cell's "type", gᵢ(tₖ), is now defined as the index, 1, ..., Nᴳ, of the maximum element of its indicator vector gᵢ(tₖ):

gᵢ(tₖ) = arg max (gᵢ(tₖ)).  (2)
              g∈ℝᴺᴳ

For an NCA to assemble a predefined target pattern of Nⱼ = Nₓ × Nᵧ target cell types ĝ = {ĝ₁, ..., ĝNⱼ}, we thus need to find a suitable set of NCA parameters that minimizes the deviation of all actual cell types gᵢ(tₚ) and the desired ones ĝᵢ after tₚ developmental time steps. Below, we introduce an evolutionary algorithm to evolve suitable sets of NCA parameters that maximize a fitness score based on comparing the "final" cell types of the NCA, gᵢ(tₚ), after the developmental stage to the predefined target cell types ĝᵢ. In this context, the NCA parameters thus correspond to the virtual organism's genotype, while the grid of final cell types represent the system-level phenotype that is seen by the selection mechanism of the evolutionary process (c.f., Figure 2 (C)).

[PAGE 10] 2.2. Neuroevolution of NCAs: An Evolutionary Algorithm Approach to Morphogenesis
Evolutionary Algorithms (EAs) are heuristic optimization techniques designed to maintain and optimize a set, or population, X = {x₁, ..., xNₚ}, comprising parameters or individuals, xⱼ ∈ ℝˣ, over successive generations in order to maximize an objective function or fitness score, r(xⱼ): ℝˣ → ℝ. Drawing inspiration from the principles of natural selection and biological life's DNA-based reproduction mechanisms, EAs (i) predominantly select high-fitness individuals for reproduction, and utilize (ii) crossover and (iii) mutation operations to generate new offspring by (ii) merging the genomic material of two high-quality individuals from the current population, xₒ = xⱼ ⊕ xₖ, and (iii) occasionally mutating offspring genomes, xₒ → xₒ + δx by adding typically Gaussian noise to the parameters; the symbol ⊕ signifies a genuine merging operation of two genomes, which may vary according to the specific EA implementation. Thus, populations of individuals are directed towards high-fitness regions within the parameter space ℝˣ, typically across numerous generations of successive selection and reproduction cycles (i)-(iii) [41].

Closely following our previous work [41], and in contrast to many "traditional" EA use-cases, we here explicitly distinguish between the genotypic parameters, xⱼ, and the corresponding phenotypic realizations, pⱼ. More specifically, we utilize NCAs (c.f., Section 2.1) to model the biologically inspired developmental layer [19] in between genotypes and phenotypes, xⱼ → pⱼ, akin to the process of morphogenesis: Here, a genotype, xⱼ, corresponds to a particular realization *j* of an NCA's parameters, comprising the set of initial cell states x⁽ˢ⁾ = {cᵢ₌(1,...,Nⱼ)(0)}; and the corresponding ANN parameters Θ = Θⱼ, such that

xⱼ = x⁽ˢ⁾ ∪ x⁽ᶠ⁾ = ({cᵢ(0)}ⱼ, Θⱼ),  (3)

where we explicitly distinguish between structural (S) and functional (F) genes. We then employ Equation (1) for tₚ developmental steps to successively transform the NCA's cell states from an initial state into a "final" set of cell types {gᵢ(tₚ)}ⱼ on the NCA's grid. This mature phenotype,

pⱼ = {gᵢ(tₚ)}ⱼ,  (4)

represents a two-dimensional tissue of cells, and is the input to the fitness score based on which the EA selects: As illustrated in Figure 2 (C), we here optimize for a fitness score in the phenotype- rather than genotype space, r(xⱼ) → r(pⱼ), while still performing genetic recombination and mutation in the genotype space.

Let's recall: our goal is to achieve morphogenesis of a two-dimensional spatial tissue of cell types, pⱼ, that optimally resembles a predefined target pattern, {ĝ₁, ..., ĝNⱼ}, of a total of Nⱼ cells on an Nₓ × Nᵧ square grid of an NCA. Moreover, we aim to derive a virtual organism with this capability by modeling a biologically inspired evolutionary process with EAs to evolve a suitable set of NCA parameters (c.f., Figure 2 (C)). Thus, we introduce our phenotype-based fitness score, r(pⱼ), as [41]

r(pⱼ) = (2ᴺᴳ - Nⱼ) + rₜn⁽ᵀ⁾ - rₛn⁽ˢ⁾,  (5)

where nᴳ counts the number of correctly assumed cell types after tₚ developmental steps (where gᵢ(tₚ) = ĝᵢ), n⁽ᵀ⁾ counts the number of developmental steps at which the target pattern is realized entirely (whenever gᵢ(tₖ < tₚ) = ĝᵢ for all *i*), and n⁽ˢ⁾ counts pairs of successive time steps, (tₛ, tₛ₊₁) ≤ tₚ, without cell type updates in the entire tissue (where gᵢ(tₛ₊₁) = gᵢ(tₛ) for all *i*).

Thus, we design an evolutionary process that primarily selects for NCAs that assume the correct cell type pattern after (precisely) tₚ developmental steps and reinforces NCAs (by a factor of rₜ in the fitness score) that prematurely achieve and maintain the target pattern. To avoid developmental stagnation and increase the EA's performance, we specifically discount the fitness score of NCAs with static behavior by rₛ. A fitness score of Nⱼ = Nₓ × Nᵧ indicates that the problem is solved.

Although the above framework [41] can be utilized in conjunction with any black-box evolutionary or genetic algorithm, we found the well-established Covariance Matrix Adaptation Evolutionary Strategy (CMA-ES) [75] to be a viable choice for our purposes.

[PAGE 11] 2.3. Information-Theoretic Analysis: Active Information Storage, Transfer Entropy and Spatial Entropy on the NCA
Information theory [84] offers valuable insights into the dynamics of complex systems. In order to understand the NCA's information dynamics during aging, we used three key information-theoretic metrics to examine the information dynamics: active information storage [77], transfer entropy [78], and spatial entropy [79].

Active Information Storage (AIS) quantifies the amount of information from an agent's past that is pertinent to predicting its future state. Specifically, AIS refers to the portion of stored information currently utilized for determining the agent's next state [77]. Mathematically, the AIS of an agent *Q* is expressed as the local mutual information between its semi-infinite past q⁽ᵏ⁾ as k → ∞ and its next state qₙ₊₁ at time step n + 1:

aQ(n + 1) = lim log₂ (p(q⁽ᵏ⁾, qₙ₊₁) / (p(q⁽ᵏ⁾)p(qₙ₊₁)))  (6)
           k→∞

Here, a(n,k) is an approximation with history length k. The time-averaged value, weighted by the distribution of (q⁽ᵏ⁾, qₙ₊₁), is denoted as AQ(k) = <aQ(n,k)>. In our study, we calculated the local AIS across the states of the cells.

Transfer Entropy (TE) measures the information transferred from a source agent to a destination agent that is not contained in the past of the destination agent. We employed the local TE concept introduced by Lizier [77]. The local TE from a source agent *Z* to a destination agent *Q* is defined as the local mutual information between the previous state of the source zₙ and the next state of the destination agent qₙ₊₁, conditioned on the semi-infinite past of the destination q⁽ᵏ⁾ as k → ∞:

tZ→Q(n + 1) = lim log₂ (p(qₙ₊₁|q⁽ᵏ⁾, zₙ) / p(qₙ₊₁|q⁽ᵏ⁾))  (7)
             k→∞

The transfer entropy TQ(n,k) is the local TE averaged over time, denoted as TQ(k) = <tQ(n,k)>, where tQ(n,k) is an approximation with history length k. Unlike mutual information, which measures static correlation, transfer entropy captures the dynamic, directional flow of information within the agent network.

Spatial Entropy (SE) measures the randomness or disorder within a spatial distribution of states. It provides insight into the complexity of spatial patterns in a system, such as an NCA with multiple states. In our study, we compute SE by evaluating the entropy of the distribution of cell states across the grid at each time step. Formally, the spatial entropy *H* at time step *n* is defined as:

H(n) = - Σ p(s) log₂ p(s)  (8)
       s∈S

where *S* is the set of possible states, and p(s) is the probability of state *s* occurring in the grid at time step *n*. This measure provides an indication of the level of unpredictability or complexity in the spatial arrangement of cell states. In this article, we calculate the spatial entropy for the states of the NCA across different time steps.


[PAGE 12] 3. System
Following our previous study [41], we utilize EAs to evolve NCAs to perform morphogenesis tasks. Each cell in our NCA implementation is equipped with a gene regulatory network-inspired recurrent ANN, conceptually substituting the intricate internal decision-making competencies of biological cells (see Figure 2 (B) for a visualization and Appendix A in [41] for numerical details). In other words, each cell in the NCA is equipped with an information processing pipeline that transforms sensory input of its local environment in the NCA's grid into control instructions to regularize its own cell type. If done in a coordinated way, these local individual cell-state updates guide the formation of a mature system-level phenotype—in our case of a target tissue—over successive developmental steps.

More specifically, we utilize Nₓ × Nᵧ = 16 × 16 cells on an NCA with fixed boundary conditions (see Section 2.1 and Appendix C in Ref. [41]) and train it analogously to [41] via evolutionary algorithms (see Section 2.2) to perform morphogenesis—i.e., self-orchestrated tissue growth—of a (16 × 16) smiley-face pattern in a predefined number of tₚ = 35 developmental steps (see Figure 2 (C) for an illustration of the evolutionary process).

The target tissue consists of Nᴳ = 3 distinct cell types: one cell type for the background cells, one for the face cells, and a single cell type for the facial organs, i.e., for the eyes and the mouth (c.f., blue-, magenta-, and white-colored cells in Figure 2 (A)). Moreover, we allow the NCA to utilize Nᴴ = 1 hidden channel of its Nᶜ = 4 cell state channels for unconstrained intercellular communication. In cell-state updates, given by Equation (1), we utilize a noise level of ξc = 0.125, limit the numerical value of the proposed action aᵢ(tₖ) to [-1,1], and clip the cell-states post-update cᵢ(tₖ₊₁) to [-3,3] (see Appendix C and Ref. [41] for more details on our NCA implementation).

Our NCAs transform an embryonic genotype, xⱼ, into a mature phenotype, pⱼ, and we here quantify an NCA's performance by evaluating the corresponding fitness score, r(pⱼ), defined by Equation (5) with respect to the (16 × 16) smiley-face pattern over the NCA's entire life-span of tₚ developmental steps. As illustrated in Figure 3, a successfully evolved NCA maximizes the fitness score to rₘₐₓ = 256, exhibiting 16 × 16 correctly expressed cell types after tₖ ≥ 20 time steps, then maintaining the target pattern until tₖ = tₚ (see Section 2.2 for details on the evolutionary process).

Notably, the cellular agents do not perceive any information about the current nor the final fitness score of their corresponding NCA. The fitness score is only utilized by the EA to optimize the NCA's parameters over evolutionary time-scales. Moreover, there is no contribution neither to the fitness score nor to the NCA's ANN sensory inputs that would provide the system with explicit temporal information indicating the "age" of any part of the virtual organism, or even a notion of "time" in general. Thus, the self-orchestrated pattern formation of the here—and previously [41]—investigated NCAs is fully driven via emergent, i.e., evolved, intercellular communication rules and intracellular decision-making.


[PAGE 12] 4. Computational Results
4.1. Aging as a Loss of Goal-Directedness: Organism Learned Development During Evolution, Not to Maintain Anatomical Homeostasis After Development
We aimed to assess whether the self-regulatory behavior of biological systems that drive morphogenesis induces aging-like phenomena at long time-frames. To this end, we use NCAs evolved in silico to model