Comparison of the depolarization
response of human mesenchymal
stem cells from different donors

Sarah Sundelacruz¹, Michael Levin² & David L. Kaplan¹

Bioelectric signaling is currently being explored as a novel regulator of cell processes in non-excitable cells. In particular, stem cells have demonstrated increasing evidence of electrophysiology-mediated regulation of stemness acquisition, proliferation, differentiation, and migration. However, in light of many reports of primary stem cell heterogeneity, it is important to characterize the variability of stem cell response to biophysical manipulations in order to assess the utility of bioelectric modulation as a universal strategy for stem cell control. In this work, human mesenchymal stem cells (hMSCs) from five donors were evaluated for their response to membrane potential (Vmem) depolarization. We compared the inter-donor variability of their osteogenic and adipogenic differentiation potential, as well as their ability to maintain a differentiated phenotype after induction. We identified the markers that responded most consistently across donors and found that calcium deposition and gene expression of bone sialoprotein, lipoprotein lipase, and fatty acid binding protein 4 are the preferred markers for assessing differentiation response to Vmem depolarization. We also note that since there exists variability even among some of these markers, these assays should be performed on any newly acquired hMSC population if their bioelectric properties are to be studied further.

Bone marrow-derived human mesenchymal stem cells (hMSCs), the non-hematopoietic, self-renewing, stromal cell fraction of the bone marrow¹'², are an attractive cell source for stem cell therapies and for regenerative medicine³⁻⁵. There exists a large body of work characterizing hMSC response to a range of biophysical and biochemical stimuli, including growth factors, cytokines, extracellular matrices, mechanical stimuli, oxygen tension, and extrinsic and intrinsic electrical fields⁶⁻¹⁰. A major goal of these characterization studies is to identify optimal stimuli for achieving desired cell functions, such as maintenance of stemness, proliferation, differentiation, and migration. HMSCs are promising candidates for cell transplantation therapies: they have been exploited for tissue repair and regeneration in orthopedic, hematopoietic, cardiac, gastrointestinal, pancreatic, renal, kidney, pulmonary, hepatic, and neurological tissues, as well as for their immunomodulatory and anti-inflammatory properties¹¹⁻¹⁴. However, pre-clinical and clinical trial data point to the need for better optimization of MSC-based therapies³,⁴,¹⁵,¹⁶. One factor that may hamper this optimization is the heterogeneity of hMSC properties depending on the donor source of the primary cells. In order for hMSCs to be a reliable cell source for therapeutic applications, it is therefore necessary to understand how cell behavior differs between donors. Studies comparing bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells or stromal cells from multiple donors have found significant differences in cell growth rate¹⁷, alkaline phosphatase expression and activity¹⁷'¹⁸, osteogenic gene expression¹⁷'¹⁸, mineralization¹⁸, bone-forming capacity¹⁸'¹⁹, adipocyte precursor frequency²⁰, surface marker expression²⁰'²¹, global proteomic signature²², and endothelial-like tube formation²³. Variables such as donor age and gender affect the function of hMSCs²¹'²⁴. Thus, it is clear from the literature that the inherent properties of hMSCs can vary significantly. If native hMSCs demonstrate such variability, it is possible that their response to experimental manipulation may also vary. Studies of the response of primary stem cells to applied biophysical or biochemical stimuli should therefore examine the behavior of cells from multiple donors in order to obtain a better understanding of the inter-donor heterogeneity of the observed response.

Bioelectric signaling is one aspect of stem cell biology that is only beginning to be studied and understood. Bioelectric signaling is known to play a role in a wide range of cell functions, including cell proliferation, migration, differentiation, wound healing, pattern formation, and tissue regeneration²⁵⁻³². The role of intrinsic cell electrophysiology in the regulation of cell function is an area of active investigation for non-excitable cells, including stem cells. HMSCs express several ion currents, including Ca²⁺-dependent K⁺ currents, delayed rectifier K⁺ currents, transient outward K⁺ currents, and slow-activating currents³³. They express several ion channels, including Kv4.3, MaxiK, L-type Ca²⁺ channels, and hyperpolarization-activated cyclic nucleotide-gated (HCN) ion channels³⁴. However, the expression of these ion channels and currents has not been investigated in terms of consistency of response among primary cells from different donors. Beyond its relevance for potential excitable functions, hMSC electrophysiology is also of interest because of its role in regulating hMSC differentiation toward osteogenic (OS) and adipogenic (AD) lineages. We have previously reported that the resting membrane potential (Vmem) of hMSCs undergoes endogenous hyperpolarization during both OS and AD differentiation, and that this hyperpolarization is required for differentiation³⁵. Artificial depolarization suppresses OS and AD differentiation, while artificial hyperpolarization augments OS differentiation³⁵. Endogenous Vmem also plays a role in maintenance of the differentiated phenotype in hMSCs that have been pre-differentiated toward osteoblasts or adipocytes³⁶. The ability to control cell fate and lineage decisions using electrophysiology would be a powerful addition to current methods of stem cell regulation. However, to date, efforts toward this end have not included a systematic assessment of the heterogeneity of hMSC response to bioelectric signals, which is critical for understanding how effective this strategy will be for primary cells that may differ significantly from donor to donor. More broadly, an understanding of robustness and intrinsic variability in bioelectric network pathways is important in order to take advantage of voltage-based pathways for regenerative medicine and synthetic bioengineering applications³⁷⁻⁴².

In the present study, we examined the effects of Vmem depolarization on the differentiation response of hMSCs derived from five different donors. First, we depolarized hMSCs undergoing OS or AD differentiation to investigate the effects of depolarization on the differentiation process. Subsequently, we depolarized hMSCs after pre-differentiating them toward osteoblasts or adipocytes to investigate the effects of depolarization on maintenance of the differentiated phenotype. We compared the five cell sources to determine whether the hMSCs exhibited a consistent response to electrophysiological modulation. We also compared different tissue-specific markers to determine which markers displayed the most consistent response to depolarization. To our knowledge, this is the first report addressing the inter-donor heterogeneity of stem cell responses to electrophysiological modulation.

[PAGE 2] Materials and Methods

[PAGE 2] Cell culture. Bone marrow aspirates were obtained through Lonza's Research Bone Marrow Donor Program (Hopkinton, MA) following approved guidelines for informed consent. Bone marrow donors were healthy males between the ages of 18 to 25 (Donor A, 25 yrs; Donor B, 25 yrs; Donor C, 22 yrs; Donor D, 25 yrs; Donor E, 18 yrs). HMSCs were isolated from aspirates as previously described³⁵. Briefly, whole bone marrow aspirates were plated in tissue-culture treated flasks at a density of 10 μL aspirate per cm² and were cultured in control medium (Dulbecco's Modified Eagle Medium (DMEM) with 10% fetal bovine serum, penicillin (100 U/mL), streptomycin (100 µg/mL), and 0.1 mM non-essential amino acids) supplemented with basic fibroblast growth factor (bFGF, 1 ng/mL) (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA). Cells were cultured in a humidified incubator at 37 °C with 5% CO₂. Hematopoietic stem cells suspended in the aspirate were removed from the adherent hMSCs after approximately five days. Upon reaching near confluence, cells were trypsinized and frozen. For subsequent cell expansion, cells were grown in control medium at 37°C maintained at 5% CO₂ and 5% O₂. To begin differentiation, cells (passages two through four) were switched to either osteogenic or adipogenic differentiation media and normoxic conditions. Osteogenic medium consisted of α-MEM supplemented with 10% FBS, penicillin (100 U/mL), streptomycin (100µg/mL), 10 mM β-glycerophosphate, 0.05 mM L-ascorbic acid-2-phosphate, and 100 nM dexamethasone (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO). Adipogenic medium consisted of control medium supplemented with 0.5 mM 3-isobutyl-1-methyl-xanthine, 1 µM dexamethasone, 5 µg/mL insulin, and 50 µM indomethacin (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO). Undifferentiated hMSCs were maintained in control medium.


[PAGE 2] Vmem depolarization. To induce Vmem depolarization, the concentration of K⁺ in the extracellular medium was elevated by the addition of potassium gluconate to the differentiation media. Changing the extracellular [K⁺] is predicted to alter Vmem according to the Goldman-Hodgkin-Katz equation. Vmem depolarization in hMSCs in response to elevated extracellular [K⁺] has been previously measured with sharp microelectrode recordings and with voltage-sensitive dyes³⁵. The final concentration of supplemented [K⁺] was 40 mM for osteogenic differentiation studies and 80 mM for adipogenic differentiation studies. For studies of the effect of depolarization on osteogenic or adipogenic differentiation, depolarization and differentiation were started on the same day, and this was considered Day 0. Depolarizing medium was replenished at each medium change until cells were harvested for the various time point analyses. For the second set of studies of the effect of depolarization after pre-differentiation, the cells were first pre-treated for two weeks in differentiation or control medium. After this period of pre-treatment, cells were switched to either high K⁺-containing differentiation medium, normal differentiation medium, or control medium for one additional week before harvesting cells for analysis. All analyses for this second set of studies were performed at this time point.

[PAGE 2] Quantitative PCR. Quantitative PCR was performed to evaluate gene expression in depolarized cells. For the studies of depolarization during differentiation, RNA was collected on Day 7, while for the studies of depolarization after pre-differentiation, RNA was collected on Day 21. RNA was isolated by phenol-chloroform extraction, followed by additional purification using RNEasy mini spin columns (Qiagen). Reverse transcription was performed using the High-Capacity cDNA Archive Kit following the manufacturer's instructions (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA). Osteogenic and adipogenic gene transcripts were amplified using the Brilliant III Fast qPCR Master Mix (Agilent Technologies) and quantified on a Stratagene Mx3000P QPCR System (Stratagene, La Jolla, CA). Primers and probes for osteogenic and adipogenic genes were obtained from TaqMan® Gene Expression Assay kits (Applied Biosystems). Transcript levels were normalized to the housekeeping gene glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH) and were reported relative to corresponding levels in undifferentiated hMSCs (n = 3–6).

[PAGE 2] Alkaline phosphatase (ALPL) activity. ALPL activity was measured on Day 14 for cells depolarized during osteogenic differentiation and on Day 21 for cells depolarized after pre-differentiation. ALPL activity was quantified in osteogenic cells using a biochemical assay that measures the amount of p-nitrophenol converted from p-nitrophenyl phosphate (pNPP) by ALPL. Samples were lysed in 0.2% v/v Triton X-100 in 5 mM MgCl₂, centrifuged at 16,000g at 4 °C for 10 min, and cleared of cellular debris. Supernatants were incubated at 37 °C with pNPP substrate in 2-amino-2-methyl-1-propanol buffer for 1.5 hours. The reaction was stopped with 0.2 M NaOH, and the absorbance of the colored product was measured at 405 nm (n = 3-8).

[PAGE 2] Calcium quantification. Total calcium levels were quantified on Day 21 for all osteogenic samples using the Calcium CPC Liquicolor Kit (Stanbio Laboratory) according to the manufacturer's instructions. Calcium was eluted from samples by incubation in 5% trichloroacetic acid. Cellular debris was removed by centrifugation at 16000g for 5 min at 25 °C. Samples were incubated with assay reagent for 5 min, and the absorbance of the end product was measured at 575 nm (n = 3-7).

[PAGE 2] DNA quantification. For normalization of ALP activity and calcium quantification data on Days 14 and 21, DNA content of samples was measured using the Quant-iT PicoGreen dsDNA Assay Kit (Invitrogen) according to the manufacturer's instructions. Briefly, samples were lysed in 0.2% v/v Triton X-100 in 5 mM MgCl₂, centrifuged at 16000g at 4°C for 10 min, and cleared of cellular debris. Supernatants were diluted with TE buffer and incubated with PicoGreen reagent, and fluorescence was measured at excitation and emission wavelengths of 480 and 520 nm, respectively (n = 3-7).

[PAGE 2] Oil Red O (ORO) staining. Lipid droplets were stained with ORO and visualized by light microscopy on Day 21 for adipogenic samples. ORO stock solution was prepared by dissolving 40 g ORO powder into 200 mL isopropanol. A working solution of ORO was prepared by mixing 6 parts ORO stock solution with 4 parts isopropanol. Cells were fixed with 10% formalin, then stained with working ORO solution for 30 min. The staining solution was removed and the cells were washed 4 times with distilled water. Cells were imaged with an inverted microscope (Axiovert S100, Carl Zeiss, Inc.) equipped with Zeiss A-Plan 10× (NA 0.25) and LD A-Plan 32× (0.40) objectives. Images captured by a Sony Exwave HAD CCD camera were acquired using ImageJ software (NIH). Photoshop software (Adobe Systems Inc.) was used to adjust brightness and contrast levels over the entire image.

[PAGE 2] Statistics. Data are reported as mean ± standard deviation. One-way ANOVA was performed, followed by a Tukey-Kramer post-hoc test. Differences between data points were considered statistically significant if p < 0.05. In bar graphs, groups that are statistically different (p < 0.05) are labeled with different letters.

[PAGE 3] Results

[PAGE 3] Depolarization during osteogenic differentiation. We quantified several bone markers to determine whether depolarization affects the progression of osteogenic differentiation: gene expression of alkaline phosphatase (ALPL) and bone sialoprotein (IBSP) on Day 7; ALPL activity on Day 14, and calcification on Day 21. ALPL expression was lowered in HK-treated cells of Donors A, B, and D by 1.75-, 1.98-, and 1.88-fold, respectively (Fig. 1A-E, p < 0.05). The two remaining donors did not exhibit a statistical difference in ALPL expression; one of these donors additionally did not exhibit a difference in ALPL levels between the osteogenic and undifferentiated groups. IBSP expression was consistently and significantly increased upon osteogenic differentiation among all donors (Fig. 2A-E). IBSP levels were lowered in HK-treated cells of Donors A, B, and D, showing a 3.32-, 2.41-, and 7.88-fold difference (p < 0.05). IBSP levels did not significantly respond to HK in Donor E, while IBSP levels unexpectedly increased in HK-treated Donor C cells (2.63-fold, p < 0.001). ALPL activity, measured on Day 14, was an overall poor indicator of osteogenic differentiation. Only one donor (Donor D) exhibited a significant increase in ALPL activity after osteogenic differentiation relative to undifferentiated cells, and the effect of HK on the enzyme activity varied widely among donors, including increased activity, decreased activity, and no effect relative to the osteogenic group (Supplemental Fig. 1A-E). Total calcium content, by contrast, was a reliable osteogenic marker: calcium content was elevated between 6.56- to 24.18-fold in all osteogenic cells compared to undifferentiated cells (Fig. 3A-E, p < 0.01). The effect of HK on calcium content was similarly consistent, decreasing significantly in all donor cells (Fig. 3A-E, 6.21- to 62.94-fold, p < 0.01). Overall, we conclude that IBSP expression and calcification are the most consistent osteogenic markers for donor-to-donor comparison of hMSC responses to Vmem perturbation, and that HK suppression of these markers is seen for three out of five donors and five out of five donors, respectively. ALP expression and activity, in contrast, were less consistent among donors and therefore may not be suitable markers for evaluating differentiation response.


[PAGE 3] Depolarization during adipogenic differentiation. HMSCs were differentiated into adipocytes and evaluated for the effect of HK treatment on several adipogenic markers, including peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor (PPARG), lipoprotein lipase (LPL), and fatty acid binding protein 4 (FABP4) transcript expression (Figs 4-6A-E). In general, transcripts showed clear upregulation upon adipogenic differentiation compared to undifferentiated hMSCs, establishing their suitability as adipogenic markers. The one exception was PPARG expression in Donor E, where although the transcript was upregulated upon differentiation, the difference was not found to be statistically significant (Fig. 4E, p = 0.066). LPL response to HK treatment was the most consistent among all five donors, exhibiting a decrease in all donors compared to the untreated adipogenic group (Fig. 5A-E, 2.04- to 52.41-fold, p < 0.05). PPARG and FABP4 expression for Donors A, B, C, and D also decreased with HK treatment (Figs 4 and 6A-D, 1.69- to 4.71-fold for PPARG, p < 0.001; and Fig. 7, 2.80- to 26.64-fold for FABP4, p < 0.01). However, in Donor E, PPARG and FABP4 expression increased by 1.74- and 2.08-fold, respectively, with only FABP4 being statistically significant (Figs 4E and 6E, p < 0.01). We conclude that HK-mediated suppression of adipogenic transcript expression is clearly seen in four out of five donors. Similarly, Oil Red O staining of lipid droplets showed modulation of adipogenic differentiation with depolarization. In Donors A, B, C, and D, HK-depolarized cells clearly exhibited a decreased frequency of positively stained cells (Fig. 7). Donor E cells, however, did not show an appreciable difference between depolarized and non-depolarized adipogenic cells (Fig. 7E). This result is consistent with Donor E cells demonstrating an atypical response to depolarization with respect to PPARG and FABP4 gene expression, as discussed above. Thus, overall, differential Oil Red O staining was seen in four out of five donors, and the one unresponsive donor could be predicted from its aberrant adipogenic gene expression pattern.


[PAGE 5] Figure 2. IBSP expression in hMSCs depolarized during osteogenic differentiation (A-E) and in pre-differentiated hMSCs (F-J). (A-E) IBSP gene expression was quantified by qPCR after 7 days of hMSC culture in osteogenic medium +40 mM K⁺ (HK), osteogenic medium (OS), or control medium (CON). (F-J) hMSCs were pre-treated for 2 weeks (OS or CON medium) before switching to HK, OS, or CON medium for 1 week. IBSP gene expression was quantified by qPCR after the entire 3 weeks of culture. Data points are mean relative expression ± standard deviation, n = 3-6. Panels A,F; B,G; C,H; D,I; and E,J correspond to data from Donors A-E, respectively. Different letters over bar graphs represent statistically different groups as determined by one-way ANOVA and the Tukey-Kramer post-hoc test, p < 0.05.

[PAGE 6] Figure 3. Total calcium content of hMSCs depolarized during osteogenic differentiation (A-E) and in pre-differentiated hMSCs (F-J). (A-E) Total calcium content was quantified by a biochemical assay after 21 days of hMSC culture in osteogenic medium +40 mM K⁺ (HK), osteogenic medium (OS), or control medium (CON). (F-J) hMSCs were pre-treated for 2 weeks (OS or CON medium) before switching to HK, OS, CON for 1 week. Total calcium content was quantified after the entire 3 weeks of culture. Data points represent mean normalized calcium content (µg Ca per µg DNA) ±standard deviation, n = 3-7. Panels A,F; B,G; C,H; D,I; and E,J correspond to data from Donors A-E, respectively. Different letters over bar graphs represent statistically different groups as determined by one-way ANOVA and the Tukey-Kramer post-hoc test, p < 0.05.

[PAGE 7] Figure 4. PPARG expression in hMSCs depolarized during adipogenic differentiation (A-E) and in pre-differentiated hMSCs (F-J). (A-E) PPARG gene expression was quantified by qPCR after 7 days of hMSC culture in adipogenic medium +80mM K⁺ (HK), adipogenic medium (AD), or control medium (CON). (F-J) hMSCs were pre-treated for 2 weeks (AD or CON medium) before switching to HK, AD, or CON medium for 1 week. PPARG gene expression was quantified by qPCR after the entire 3 weeks of culture. Data points are mean relative expression ±standard deviation, n = 4-6. Panels A,F; B,G; C,H; D,I; and E,J correspond to data from Donors A-E, respectively. Different letters over bar graphs represent statistically different groups as determined by one-way ANOVA and the Tukey-Kramer post-hoc test, p < 0.05.

[PAGE 8] Figure 5. LPL expression in hMSCs depolarized during adipogenic differentiation (A-E) and in pre-differentiated hMSC (F-J). (A-E) LPL gene expression was quantified by qPCR after 7 days of hMSC culture in adipogenic medium + 80 mM K⁺ (HK), adipogenic medium (AD), or control medium (CON). (F-J) hMSCs were pre-treated for 2 weeks (AD or CON medium) before switching to HK, AD, or CON medium for 1 week. LPL gene expression was quantified by qPCR after the entire 3 weeks of culture. Data points are mean relative expression ±standard deviation, n = 4-6. Panels A,F; B,G; C,H; D,I; and E,J correspond to data from Donors A-E, respectively. Different letters over bar graphs represent statistically different groups as determined by one-way ANOVA and the Tukey-Kramer post-hoc test, p < 0.05.

[PAGE 9] Figure 6. FABP4 expression in hMSCs depolarized during adipogenic differentiation (A-E) and in pre-differentiated hMSCs (F-J). (A-E) FABP4 gene expression was quantified by qPCR after 7 days of hMSC culture in adipogenic medium +80mM K⁺ (HK), adipogenic medium (AD), or control medium (CON). (F-J) hMSCs were pre-treated for 2 weeks (AD or CON medium) before switching HK, AD, or CON medium for 1 week. FABP4 gene expression was quantified by qPCR after the entire 3 weeks of culture. Data points are mean relative expression ±standard deviation, n = 4-6. Panels A,F; B,G; C,H; D,I; and E,J correspond to data from Donors A-E, respectively. Different letters over bar graphs represent statistically different groups as determined by one-way ANOVA and the Tukey-Kramer post-hoc test, p < 0.05.

[PAGE 10] Figure 7. Oil Red O staining of lipids in hMSCs during adipogenic differentiation. Oil Red O staining of lipid droplets in hMSCs cultured for three weeks in adipogenic medium +80 mM K⁺ (HK), adipogenic medium (AD), or control medium (CON). Rows A-E correspond to images from Donors A-E, respectively. Scale bar = 200 µm.


[PAGE 11] Depolarization after osteogenic pre-differentiation. We conducted similar experiments on hMSCs pre-differentiated into osteoblasts. HK was added to the cells after pre-differentiation, and we measured ALPL and IBSP expression, ALP activity, and calcification on Day 21. ALPL expression, although significantly different in the osteogenic group (OS-OS) relative to the undifferentiated group (CON-CON) in all donors, was either unchanged after HK treatment (Donors A, B, D) or slightly elevated after HK treatment (Donor C: 1.90-fold, p<0.001; Donor E: 1.44-fold, p < 0.001) compared to the untreated osteogenic group (Fig. 1F-J). As in the above results with hMSCs depolarized immediately at the start of osteogenic differentiation, we found ALPL activity to again be an inconsistent osteogenic marker: osteogenic cells were found to have the same, increased, or decreased enzyme activity relative to undifferentiated cells in the five donors, and depolarization generally had no significant effect in four out of the five donors (Donors B, C, D, E) (Supplemental Fig. 1F-J). IBSP expression was significantly elevated in the osteogenic group compared to the undifferentiated group in four donors (Donors A, C, D, and E) (Fig. 2F-J). Upon HK treatment, these four donors exhibited consistently lower IBSP transcript levels compared to the untreated osteogenic group (1.36- to 2.57-fold decrease, p < 0.05, Fig. 2F-J). Calcification again performed well as a bone marker across donors: in all five donors, osteogenic cells exhibited significantly increased calcium levels relative to undifferentiated cells (7.06- to 31.88-fold increases, p < 0.001, Fig. 3F-J). Additionally, HK treatment resulted in significantly decreased calcium levels in four out of five donors (2.46- to 4.25-fold decrease, p<0.05, Donors B, C, D, E) (Fig. 3F-J). Overall, we found that IBSP transcript levels and calcium levels were the most consistent markers for evaluating maintenance of the osteogenic phenotype, and that depolarization resulted in decreased marker expression in four out of the five donors. Our results were less consistent for ALPL: enzyme activity varied widely among all samples from all donors, such that a definitive pattern was not observed, and transcript expression, while showing consistent upregulation in the osteogenic groups, did not show a clear depolarization response.

[PAGE 11] Depolarization after adipogenic pre-differentiation. In hMSCs pre-differentiated toward adipocytes, we evaluated the effect of HK treatment on maintenance of the adipogenic phenotype, as measured by PPARG, LPL, and FABP4 transcript expression on Day 7. We verified that expression of these genes was higher in untreated differentiated cells compared to controls in all donor cells. We then examined the response of cells to one week of HK treatment after two weeks of pre-differentiation. Depolarization suppressed PPARG expression in three out of five donors (Donors A, B, C; 2.1- to 4.9-fold; p < 0.001), while having no significant effect for the other two donors (Donors D and E).


[PAGE 11] Discussion
Growing interest in the electrophysiology of pluripotent stem cells has been stimulated by increasing evidence that endogenous bioelectric properties play important roles in non-excitable cell functions, and that these properties can be modulated for desired outcomes. Although these and other studies suggest that the electrophysiological state can be modulated for desired cell behaviors, it is important to note that primary stem cells can exhibit significant heterogeneity depending on their donor source. Evaluation of lipid droplets by Oil Red O staining showed a similar pattern, with four out of five donors exhibiting a decrease in lipid droplets upon depolarization. The atypical response was again found in Donor E, where HK upregulated transcript expression instead of suppressing it.

[PAGE 13] References
1. Friedenstein, A. J., Petrakova, K. V., Kurolesova, A. I. & Frolova, G. P. Heterotopic of bone marrow. Analysis of precursor cells for osteogenic and hematopoietic tissues. Transplantation 6, 230-247 (1968).
2. Friedenstein, A. J., Piatetzky, S., II & Petrakova, K. V. Osteogenesis in transplants of bone marrow cells. J Embryol Exp Morphol 16, 381-390 (1966).
... (References 3-60 as listed in Extraction 3)

[PAGE 15] Acknowledgements
We thank the NIH for support through the Tissue Engineering Resource Center (P41 EB002520), R01 AR005593, and R01 AR061988; the G. Harold and Leila Y. Mathers Charitable Foundation; and the W. M. Keck Foundation. Acknowledgement of grants: NIH (Tissue Engineering Resource Center (P41 EB002520), R01 AR005593, and R01 AR061988), G. Harold and Leila Y. Mathers Charitable Foundation, W. M. Keck Foundation.

[PAGE 15] Author Contributions
S.S. Conception and design, Collection and assembly of data, Data analysis and interpretation, Manuscript writing. M.L. Conception and design, Final approval of manuscript. D.L.K. Conception and design, Financial support, Final approval of manuscript.

[PAGE 15] Additional Information
Supplementary information accompanies this paper at http://www.nature.com/srep
Competing financial interests: The authors declare no competing financial interests.
How to cite this article: Sundelacruz, S. et al. Comparison of the depolarization response of human mesenchymal stem cells from different donors. Sci. Rep. 5, 18279; doi: 10.1038/srep18279 (2015).
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons license, unless indicated otherwise in the credit line; if the material is not included under the Creative Commons license, users will need to obtain permission from the license holder to reproduce the material. To view a copy of this license, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/