The neural crest as a bioelectric Rosetta Stone:
translating the analog and digital bioelectric code with Fluorescent Lifetime
Imaging (FLIM)

McMillen, P.1,2, Levin, M.1,2,*

1 Allen Discovery Center at Tufts University, Medford, MA 02155, USA.
2 Wyss Institute for Biologically Inspired Engineering, Harvard University, Boston, MA
02115, USA.

* Corresponding author:
200 Boston Ave., Suite 4600
Medford, MA 02155
Email: michael.levin@tufts.edu

Running title: Bioelectric Rosetta Stone

Keywords: Bioelectricity, FLIM, Bioelectric Imaging, Neural Crest Cells


[PAGE 2] Abstract:
Translating the bioelectric code remains one of the core challenges to widespread
biomedical translation of bioelectric interventions, as well as a better evolutionary
understanding of how developmental ionic signaling became the basis of neural
intelligence. Thus, it is essential to develop model systems and protocols in which diverse
bioelectrical parameters can be quantitatively studied together, in the living state, and
connected to cell- and tissue-level outcomes. Here, we apply state-of-the-art quantitative
Fluorescent Lifetime Imaging (FLIM) optical estimation of membrane potential (Vmem) to
map the bioelectric dynamics of spreading Xenopus laevis neural crest cells over roughly
18-hour time periods. We identify a slow "analog" bioelectric component that functions
on the scale of hours, and a faster "digital" component that acts on the scale of seconds.
We then use information theory to show that digital NCC Vmem dynamics are largely
distinct from calcium dynamics. Finally, we provide a survey of diverse bioelectric events
revealing a deep complexity in collective bioelectric dynamics, likely involving tunneling
nanotubes in their transmission, which suggests numerous avenues for further
investigation.


[PAGE 3] Introduction
Translating the languages of life
After the fall of their empire, the hieroglyphic language of the Ancient Egyptians
was lost to European scholars, hiding from them crucial insights into the foundations of
their own more modern culture. The discovery of the Rosetta Stone, a tablet containing
a single message written in ancient Egyptian hieroglyphs, ancient Egyptian script, and
the accessible language of Greek, allowed them to translate this lost language and
access the secrets that it held. Contemporary biologists face a similar challenge to that
of 19th century Egyptologists: decoding the ancient languages of our progenitors to better
understand ourselves (Figure 1A).

The use of codes is not exclusive to human culture. Biology is replete with
encodings, occurring at different size scales and implemented in different types of
substrates [1-4]. Advances in bioengineering and regenerative medicine, as well as the
basic understanding of evolutionary biology and cognitive science require that we learn
to read and write these codes. Our ability to glean information from measurements, and
to rationally manipulate molecular and biophysical states, to reliably achieve complex,
system-level outcomes in living systems, depends on knowing the mapping between input
states and subsequent outcomes.

The purpose of language is to communicate information in a way that increases
functional alignment among individuals, and a key early step in translating a language is
understanding how information in encoded. This was the central insight of Jean-Francois
Champollion, who first used the Rosetta Stone to translate hieroglyphics: "Hieroglyphic
writing is a complex system, a script all at once figurative, symbolic and phonetic, in one
and the same text, in one and the same sentence, and, I might even venture, one and
the same word." (cited in [5]). To understand developmental and regenerative
morphogenesis, as well as diseases of cellular cooperation such as cancer, it is essential
to characterize the diverse communication pathways occurring among cells and the ways
in which cellular interpretation of biophysical states orchestrates functional alignment of
cells toward adaptive and consistent anatomical outcomes [6, 7]. Like the hieroglyphic
language, we hypothesize that bioelectricity may encode information in multiple different
modalities in parallel, showing a tractable and biomedically relevant modality in which
physics and semiotics intersect [2, 8].

One particularly interesting physical medium for encoding in living media is
bioelectricity. Neuroscience, via its project of neural decoding [9-12], is largely predicated
on the idea that mental content the ability to flexibly navigate a problem space toward
adaptive outcomes is encoded in electrophysiological states. However, bioelectric
networks did not first appear in brains - they are an ancient method of encoding and using
information, dating back to bacterial biofilms [13] and gaining its full development as a
precursor to the control of motility by regulating traversals of anatomical morphospace
[14, 15]. We have previously suggested that the binding function that electrophysiology
serves in brains – mediating the coordination of large numbers of neurons toward
outcomes at the organismal behavior level – extends to (and derives from) developmental
biology non-neural cells' need to cooperate together toward complex, unified anatomical
outcomes [7, 16]. This suggests extension of the neural decoding field [9-12] to other
tissues in the body, especially those that are undergoing active pattern formation [16].


[PAGE 4] Bioelectricity as a primordial cellular language
There is a rapidly growing body of evidence that non-neural bioelectricity plays
important roles in development, regeneration, cancer progression, and evolution [17-19]
(Figure 1B). Voltage parameters regulate stem cell differentiation [20-24], proliferation
[25-29], gene expression [30, 31], and cellular interpretation of canonical biochemical
signaling factors [32-35]. Misexpresion of ion channels induces ectopic eyes formation in
Xenopus embryos, even outside of areas competent eye induction by the "master
regulator" gene pax6 [36]. Bioelectricity regulates wing development in Drosophila [37],
the size of zebrafish fins [38], and the patterning of the vertebrate heart, brain, and face
[39-42]. It has also been implicated in evolution of the highly specialized fins of flying
fishes [43]. Bioelectric intervention has been shown to rescue regeneration in non-
regenerative contexts [44, 45], overcome chemical and genetic teratogenesis [46], and
normalize tumor like structures induced by human oncogenes [47-50].

Bioelectricity is also an appealing avenue for biomedical intervention due to the
diverse array of interventional reagents that can induce complex, coordinated
downstream responses – electroceuticals - many of which are already FDA approved
because of their role in neuromedicine and other indications [51, 52]. And yet, predicting
outcomes of bioelectric intervention, diagnosis of underlying bioelectric causes of
pathology and integration of bioelectricity with the greater cell, molecular and
developmental biology knowledgebase has proved challenging due to the daunting
technical challenge of observing and interpreting the dynamics of bioelectric patterns at
physiologically meaningful timescales. Bioelectricity is a complex computational medium
[53] that cannot be controlled by simple 1-to-1 input-to-output relations, and in order to
control the bioelectric code, we must be able to read it. Here we report efforts to use the
embryonic cell population known as the neural crest as a model system in which to
address bioelectrical encoding of developmentally-relevant information [54-57].

The neural crest as a Bioelectric Rosetta Stone
The neural crest is a multipotent stem cell population that sits at the interface
between the neural and non-neural paradigms, ultimately differentiating into both neural
and non-neural cell types [58-61]. Neural tissue is induced by cues secreted by the
notochord, a transient medial organizing structure. Ectodermal cells that receive
insufficient inductive cues from the notochord remain non-neural, while cells that receive
an intermediate dose become neural crest, which can adopt both neural and non-neural
fates. Neural crest cells (NCCs) collectively and intelligently navigate the forming embryo
to adopt a diverse variety [62, 63] of fates with cells becoming peripheral neurons, heart
cells, melanocytes and cranial bone and cartilage among others. And, especially relevant
to our study, they and have repeatedly been shown to be bioelectrically active. Amphibian
NCCs electrotax toward the cathode of exogenously generated electric fields [64, 65].
Moreover, mutation of multiple key bioelectric effectors prevents normal NCC
development, including K+ channels [66, 67], calcium channels [68], gap junctions [62,
63], and the mechanosensitive cation non-specific channel Piezo1 [69].

Because of its intermediate state between neural and non-neural cells, we envision
the neural crest as a sort of bioelectric Rosetta Stone that may help translate between
different aspects of ionic signaling. The Rosetta Stone allowed archaeologists to
understand the language of a precursor civilization and, in so doing, to better understand


[PAGE 5] the foundations of their own more modern culture. Similarly, we propose that bioelectric
study of the neural crest will allow us to translate the powerful theoretical and
methodological advances of neuroscience to the more ancient functions of non-neural
biology, while in turn providing insights into developing insights into primitive cognition
that will provide novel insights into the evolution and function of the brain (Figure 1A).

Beyond its appeal as an intermediary between neural and non-neural cell behavior,
neural crest cells are an important model for collective cell behavior [70-76]. NCC
collectives chemotax towards the attractant Sdf1a, while individual cells are unable to do
so[77] demonstrating that the collective is greater than the sum of its parts. Cells
expressing a dominant negative version of the Sdf1a receptor CXCR4 regain the ability
to chemotax toward Sdf1a when mixed into a collective with wild type cells[77], further
evidencing the collective nature of this tissue. NCC collectivity is structural as well as
function, as NCCs form supracellular Actin cables that drive migrating collectives in vitro
and in vivo [78].

NCCs demonstrate notable collective intelligence per William James' definition of
intelligence as the ability to achieve the same goal via different paths [15, 79]. They show
remarkable ability to do so: for example, in response to ablation they can migrate to
deficient regions through non-canonical paths [80, 81] (as do neurons [82]), and they can
regulate their numbers either up or down, as needed, to achieve correct target
morphology [83]. Perhaps most impressively, mouse neural crest cells grafted into
chicken embryos can successfully navigate their new environment and successfully form
teeth in the chicken's beak [84]. This complex and highly plastic behavioral repertoire
points to an underlying complexity and context-sensitive behavior that makes the neural
crest and appealing model for studying bioelectric communication and more generally,
collective behavior in anatomical state space [85].

Finding the information in the bioelectric code
Neural bioelectric signals are staggeringly fast, complex, and very large in
magnitude of the voltage change achieved per unit time. More primitive non-neural
bioelectric signals, in contrast, are much slower and weaker in magnitude. Myosin
provides a useful analogy for bioelectricity. Muscles contain a highly specialized
actomyosin system the facilitates production of macroscale levels of force. A less
specialized version of non-muscle myosin pervades eukaryotic biology, driving cell motion
and cell and tissue contractility [86]. But while there is a conservation of their molecular
mechanism, the tools required to study organismal and cell motility are very different.
Similarly, while powerful tools like patch, whole-cell clamping, and multi-electrode arrays
(MEAs) have been developed for neural bioelectric signals, the toolkit for reading non-
neural bioelectric signals is far more limited [87-89].

Neuroscientists have circumvented these challenges to some degree with calcium
imaging, which facilitates relatively non-invasive measurement of long-term
measurement of a large number of cells in unison [90, 91]. While bioelectric intervention
can alter calcium signals during development [92], it remains unclear how well calcium
signaling reflects non-neural bioelectric communication, especially over long periods of
time [93]. Specifically, because several other transduction mechanisms leading from
voltage change to gene expression changes, besides the opening of voltage-gated

[PAGE 5] Finding the information in the bioelectric code
Neural bioelectric signals are staggeringly fast, complex, and very large in
magnitude of the voltage change achieved per unit time. More primitive non-neural
bioelectric signals, in contrast, are much slower and weaker in magnitude. Myosin
provides a useful analogy for bioelectricity. Muscles contain a highly specialized
actomyosin system the facilitates production of macroscale levels of force. A less
specialized version of non-muscle myosin pervades eukaryotic biology, driving cell motion
and cell and tissue contractility [86]. But while there is a conservation of their molecular
mechanism, the tools required to study organismal and cell motility are very different.
Similarly, while powerful tools like patch, whole-cell clamping, and multi-electrode arrays
(MEAs) have been developed for neural bioelectric signals, the toolkit for reading non-
neural bioelectric signals is far more limited [87-89].
Neuroscientists have circumvented these challenges to some degree with calcium
imaging, which facilitates relatively non-invasive measurement of long-term
measurement of a large number of cells in unison [90, 91]. While bioelectric intervention
can alter calcium signals during development [92], it remains unclear how well calcium
signaling reflects non-neural bioelectric communication, especially over long periods of
time [93]. Specifically, because several other transduction mechanisms leading from
voltage change to gene expression changes, besides the opening of voltage-gated
calcium signals, have been studied, it is unlikely that calcium readouts capture the entire
richness of cells' responses to endogenous bioelectric events [94].

[PAGE 6] 
Evan Miller's group has developed a promising technology that combines their
VoltageFluor (VF) dye system with the highly quantitative imaging tool Fluorescent
Lifetime Imaging (FLIM) [95, 96]. VF dyes comprise a fluorophore, a molecular wire, and
an electron donation quencher (Figure 2A). They insert into the cell membrane like a
thumb tack, and once inserted their intensity and fluorescent lifetime change as the
direction of the local electric field either pushes the electrons into the fluorophore
(hyperpolarization), reducing its intensity and lifetime, or draws them out of it
(depolarization), increasing intensity and lifetime. Because lifetime is an intrinsic property
of a fluorophore that does not directly scale with dye concentration, FLIM largely
eliminates confounds stemming from differential dye incorporation and cell shape
changes (Figure 2B-D"). This is critical for reading non-neural bioelectric signals which
tend to be very low magnitude and change over long time-periods, causing them to be
easily obscured by even modest artifacts. We use FLIM with the highly photostable far-
red VF dye BeRST [97] to enable long-term (>17 hours) bioelectric imaging with minimal
phototoxicity and photobleaching for the first time in primary tissue explants.
Here, we seek to uncover ways in which information is encoded in bioelectric
signals. Our approach is founded on Claude Shannon's definition of Information [98],
which is mathematically similar to the thermodynamic concept of entropy and increases
with increasing diversity of states in a system. We discuss the application of Information
Theory to biological signal discrimination in greater depth in [99], and apply it to
cytoskeletal and calcium signal dynamics in relatively stationary Xenopus laevis animal
cap explants. Shannon information is highest in systems with high variability, and it
follows that such systems are the most appealing candidates as bioelectric
communication modalities. Here we extend this methodology to map information flow
between previously-undescribed optically estimated Vmem and calcium dynamics to
migrating neural crest cell explants for an extended time period. We find that, unlike in
neurons [90, 91], Vmem and calcium dynamics in neural crest are largely independent,
revealing a fascinating aspect of the evolution of ionic signaling in multicellular contexts
[14, 100-102].

[PAGE 6] Methods
Frog rearing and mRNA injection
Animal care was done in compliance with and approval from the Institutional
Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC) under protocol number M2023-18 of Tufts
University. Capped and tagged mRNA was generated used an mMessage Sp6 in vitro
transcription kit (ThermoFisher). Embryos were microinjected 4 were injected 4X at the
2-4 cell stage with a bolus of roughly 0.9µm outer diameter with mRNA containing 600
ng/µL JGCAMP8s mRNA [103], 10 ng/µL mCherry-Erk2 [104] and 200 ng/µL LifeAct-
Turquoise2 [105] in RNAse-Free water (Ambion).
pLifeAct-mTurquoise2 was a gift from Dorus Gadella (Addgene plasmid # 36201;
http://n2t.net/addgene:36201; RRID:Addgene_36201). pHR SFFVp BFP-Erk2 was a gift

[PAGE 7] 
from Wendell Lim (Addgene plasmid # 50848; http://n2t.net/addgene:50848;
RRID:Addgene_50848).

Neural Crest (NC) explanting onto Fibronectin (FN) coated cover glass
NC explant procedure was modified from Gouignard et al., 2021 [106]. NC
removal was performed in Danilchick's For Amy (DFA) [107] media to minimize bioelectric
effects from multiple media changes. Neural crest explants were removed during
neurulation prior to closure of the anterior neural tube (NF stages 15-17). mRNA injection
of multiple sensors coupled with rearing at 22°C through gastrulation induces slight
heterochrony, and while effort was made to take explants from similarly aged embryos we
report a conservatively large stage window. We attempted to mitigate effects of stage
variation by cutting 4-5 explants per excised neural crest, pooling and thoroughly mixing
the explants in DFA buffer and distributing explants evenly between conditions.
We performed experiments on three separate replicates form distinct clutches of eggs.
For each replicate, we changed the spatial location of the three K+ conditions to mitigate
possible confounds from well location or explant imaging order. It is impractical to confirm
the molecular identity of each explanted cell as such testing generally requires either
genetically encodable reporters or fixation of the tissue, neither of which is compatible
with our analysis. We therefore avoid referring to these explants as 'neural crest cells,'
instead using the term 'neural crest explants' to acknowledge the possibility of
contamination with, or differentiation into, specific tissue types.

Optically estimated membrane potential (Vmeme)
While FLIM greatly improves the quantitative power of bioelectric imaging, as well
as allowing monitoring of large numbers of cells, over developmental timescales, all
without the disruption of penetrating them with electrodes, it is unreasonable to expect
that bioelectric imaging maintains the same magnitude of accuracy as classic
electrophysiological techniques in all cell types at all times. Dye internalization, artifacts
from dye trapping, Vmem-independent effects on lifetime and other unforeseeable artifacts
are necessary limitations of the current state of the technology. However, optical
estimation does not suffer from the many confounds introduced by comparatively invasive
electrophysiology techniques [87]. We use the nomenclature "Optically Estimated Vmem”
Vmeme throughout this paper to prevent confusion about what exactly we are reporting.

[PAGE 7] Dye staining
Explants were stained in standard DFA buffer containing 4.5mM K+ gluconate,
50uL Nuc Blue reagent (Hoechst 33342, Invitrogen R37605) and 5ul of 0.5mM BeRST
DMSO stock (gift of Evan Miller, synthesized by Pharmaron, China) for 30 minutes in a
22°C incubator while being covered from light. Staining media was gradually introduced
to 8-well glass bottom chambered coverslips (Ibidi) to minimize disruption to explants and
mixed between chambers to minimize uneven staining.

[PAGE 7] Imaging
Imaging was performed using a Leica Stellaris 8 confocal microscope. Imaging
conditions and directory of relevant metadata files (included as supplemental pdf files) is
presented in Supplemental Table 1. Long-term imaging was performed at 20°C. For the

[PAGE 8] 
quantitative dataset discussed in Figures 3-6 independent replicates were performed with
eggs collected from different clutches. 9 total explants were imaged per condition, 3 in
each imaging session for the data in these figures. Slight variation due to stage travel rate
was present between the three replicates, but because this amounted to only a few
minutes over the 17-hour plus duration timepoints between replicates were pooled.
Images displayed may be from either 0.5 mM K+, 4.5 mM K+ or 8.5 mM K+ condition
unless specified. Some images were scaled up in Fiji without interpolation to make
cleaner figures and movies.

[PAGE 8] Image analysis
LasX FLIM quantification: Curve fitting is performed using the LasX FLIM/FCS
module. While Lazzari-Dean et al. [95] use a bi-exponential decay fit for VF2.1.Cl and a
mono-exponential decay fit for VF2.0.Cl, we used a mono-exponential fit for all
fluorophores due to the relatively low photon counts. For timeseries data reported in
Figures 3-6 BeRST lifetime images were binned in LasX prior to exporting to improve
curve fitting by increasing photon values per fit, then scaled up in Fiji [108] using bilinear
interpolation or in CellProfiler .
Whole-explant quantification: Explant timeseries were exported from LasX as
separate intensity and lifetime channels. An intensity factor of 1 per count and a lifetime
factor or 0.001 per count were applied so that 16-bit images scaled to picoseconds would
be produced for analysis. Unless processed by CellProfiler, binary masks were produced
using either the BeRST intensity channel or NucBlue signal.
Kymographs: Kymorgaphs are produced by using the NucBlue signal to mask the
channels of interest then running the Radial Reslice tool in ImageJ and producing an
average intensity projection. A radius is drawn from Images are formatted as 32-bit with
background set to NaN to prevent below-threshold pixels from affecting the data. Positive
derivative images are generated by subtracting an image from the image at the next
timepoint and discarding any values below 0.
Cell Profiler nucleus outlining: Our CellProfiler [109, 110] pipeline is attached as
Supplemental Methods 1. In this study CellProfiler was only used to outline nuclei in
Supplemental Movie 7.

[PAGE 8] Informational analysis of Vmemºº and calcium kymographs
The kymographs are cropped to a height of 240 pixels, removing the outermost
pixels and binarized with a manually derived threshold, one threshold value being used
for all Vmeme kymographs and another for all calcium kymographs. y-axis is then median-
binned by a factor of 16 to produce an image 15 pixels high, with the pixels representing
average values of a series of concentric circles 16 pixels thick. The x-axis of the resulting
kymograph is replaced with time, converting the single kymograph image into a timeseries
one pixel thick and 15 pixels high. Both timelapses are then spatially scaled up 100-fold
and segmented to make each original pixel into a distinct ROI and a mosaic timelapse
with calcium values on the left and Vmeme values on the right created and saved as an
.avi format file. The Information Theory software package CAIM [111] was then used to
extract timeseries data from each ROI and calculate the Information within each signaling
paradigm at each ROI and the Mutual Information between each channel and each ROI.

[PAGE 9] 
Data was processed in Excel and statistically analyzed and plotted in Prism. Statistical
significance was determined using Friedmann's test with Dunn's multiple comparison test.

Bioelectric event size estimation
Binarized data from the information analysis above was used to estimate the
average size of bioelectric events within each explant. The average number of ROls with
signal was measured from each timepoint containing at least one active ROI in either the
Vmeme or Calcium paradigm were tabulated, then an average event size for each explant
was determined. Explants that did not contain at least one Vmeme event and one calcium
event were excluded. Statistical significance was calculated in GraphPad Prism using a
paired t-test.

[PAGE 9] Scan speed bioelectric event dynamic estimation
We observed linear signals perpendicular to the direction of scan speed. We
divided the frame capture duration of the image by the number of scan lines composing
it to estimate the dwell time for each scan line. We then used ImageJ to draw a line along
the masked lifetime image (background pixels being set as NaNs were not included in the
analysis) parallel to the scan direction and manually defined to be thick enough to
encompass the bioelectric event with minimal contamination from nearby cells. We
extracted the variation in lifetime over space using the Plot Profile tool in ImageJ and
converted the spatial component to time using the scan line dwell time estimate and
plotted the resulting lifetime vs. time plot.

[PAGE 9] Statistics
Lazic et al. [112], Lord et al. [113], and Motulsky [114] were used as guides for
statistical analysis Multiple neural crests from different animals were cut into smaller
explants which were randomized and sorted into different K+ conditions. Because
randomization occurred at the explant level the sample size was calculated as the number
of explants, and different explants were used as replicates for statistics. Explants were
collected from 3 separate clutches and imaged in three separate sessions with the 3
conditions being imaged in parallel. Out of efficiency concerns we do not explicitly
account for possible clutch and imaging session level variability in our statistics, though
in Figure 3A we used different colored spots for each of the three replicates. Because
long-term timelapses are time consuming, for both information and event size estimation
we pool data from all three K+ concentration conditions to increase statistical power and
use color to denote to which condition each datapoint belongs. For the event size
estimation explants that do not have both Vmeme and Calcium events were excluded.
Statistical tests were conducted using GraphPad Prism 10.4.0 in accordance with its
recommendations [114].

[PAGE 9] Data was processed in Excel and statistically analyzed and plotted in Prism. Statistical
significance was determined using Friedmann's test with Dunn's multiple comparison test.

Bioelectric event size estimation
Binarized data from the information analysis above was used to estimate the
average size of bioelectric events within each explant. The average number of ROIs with
signal was measured from each timepoint containing at least one active ROI in either the
Vmem or Calcium paradigm were tabulated, then an average event size for each explant
was determined. Explants that did not contain at least one Vmem event and one calcium
event were excluded. Statistical significance was calculated in GraphPad Prism using a
paired t-test.

Scan speed bioelectric event dynamic estimation
We observed linear signals perpendicular to the direction of scan speed. We
divided the frame capture duration of the image by the number of scan lines composing
it to estimate the dwell time for each scan line. We then used ImageJ to draw a line along
the masked lifetime image (background pixels being set as NaNs were not included in the
analysis) parallel to the scan direction and manually defined to be thick enough to
encompass the bioelectric event with minimal contamination from nearby cells. We
extracted the variation in lifetime over space using the Plot Profile tool in ImageJ and
converted the spatial component to time using the scan line dwell time estimate and
plotted the resulting lifetime vs. time plot.

Statistics
Lazic et al. [112], Lord et al. [113], and Motulsky [114] were used as guides for
statistical analysis Multiple neural crests from different animals were cut into smaller
explants which were randomized and sorted into different K+ conditions. Because
randomization occurred at the explant level the sample size was calculated as the number
of explants, and different explants were used as replicates for statistics. Explants were
collected from 3 separate clutches and imaged in three separate sessions with the 3
conditions being imaged in parallel. Out of efficiency concerns we do not explicitly
account for possible clutch and imaging session level variability in our statistics, though
in Figure 3A we used different colored spots for each of the three replicates. Because
long-term timelapses are time consuming, for both information and event size estimation
we pool data from all three K+ concentration conditions to increase statistical power and
use color to denote to which condition each datapoint belongs. For the event size
estimation explants that do not have both Vmem and Calcium events were excluded.
Statistical tests were conducted using GraphPad Prism 10.4.0 in accordance with its
recommendations [114].


[PAGE 10] Results
As with the characterization of any new information medium or coding modality,
use of a model system for cracking the bioelectric code requires knowledge of the kind of
bioelectric properties of which it is capable (analog vs. digital signals, signaling "frame
rate", bandwidth in terms of ability to carry different states per unit area, etc.), as well as
a knowledge of how these properties respond to stimuli. We examined these in the
Xenopus neural crest as follows.

Three-dye bioelectric FLIM imaging reveals spatial bioelectric variation obscured in
standard non-FLIM imaging
We hypothesized that there exist subtle bioelectric patterns in spreading neural
crest explants that are not readily detectable by intensity-only fluorescent imaging. In
order to test this, we compared the Vmem patterns optically estimated by intensity and
lifetime using a set of three bioelectric dyes.
We recently described a strategy [115] to validate specificity of bioelectric patterns
detected with BeRST using the control dyes VF2.1.Cl, the lifetime properties have been
rigorously quantified with electrophysiology[95], and VF2.0.CI, a negative control variant
of VF2.1.CI lacking the electron donating quencher that confers Vmem sensitivity. We have
found that co-staining NC explants with BeRST and VF2.0.CI dramatically reduces the
lifetime and variability of the VF2.0.CI signal, suggesting a possible FRET interaction
between the two dyes (data not shown). We therefore avoided co-staining BeRST with
either VF2.1.Cl or VF2.0CI, instead staining separate explants in parallel. Conclusions
were based on two separate clutches comprising 9 explants stained with VF2.0.CI, 8
explants stained with VF2.1.Cl and 13 explants stained with BeRST. Imaging conditions
were altered slightly between explants to generate comparable images. Explants
presented in Figure 2 were not obtained from injected embryos to prevent crosstalk
between constructs and VF2.0.Cl and VF2.1.CI.
Comparison of the intensity (B-C") and lifetime (D-D") components of the three
dyes demonstrated the value of FLIM for reading bioelectric states. In the intensity
pictures, cell shape appeared to play a major role in apparent Vmem. With all three dyes
sites of cell-overlap appeared relatively depolarized due the increased local dye
concentration generating, a circumferential ring that is not present in the lifetime images.
Figure 2B' and C' showing the intensity of the Vmem sensitive dye VF2.1.Cl are especially
problematic, as they suggested that the central cell clusters are much more depolarized
than the individual spreading cells. However, this pattern was also present in panels B"
and C" using the Vmem insensitive dye VF2.0.CI, strongly indicating that these patterns
are false positives. The FLIM data in panels D' and D" further supported this conclusion
as the VF2.1.Cl stained explant has a different pattern from the VF2.0.Cl stained control,
which is more uniform. Thus, FLIM removed major sources of noise and reveals subtle
bioelectric patterns that this noise obscures.
We observed a few differences, however, indicating possible artifacts. Both
VF2.1.CI and VF2.0.Cl occasionally showed a reduced lifetime in dense clumps of tissue
(Figure 3F,G, asterices). This pattern was not present with BeRST, and indeed the
opposite tends to be true with dense tissue often having elevated lifetimes consistent with
depolarization (Figure 3D", D", E asterisk). One known artifact of VF-FLIM is self-


[PAGE 11] quenching at high dye concentrations[95]. Due to the density of pre-migratory explants
and our desire to do long-term imaging with minimal photon requirements we used BeRST
at a relatively high concentration (5µm) to increase evenness of penetration. The VF
dyes tended to penetrate tissue more effectively than BeRST, meaning that they likely
had an even higher local concentration. We interpreted these data to mean that dense
tissue tended to be depolarized on the inside and hyperpolarized on the periphery and
that this effect is if anything underestimated due to dye quenching artifacts. We also
observed that neurites have an elevated lifetime with VF2.1.CI, indicative of
depolarization (D"), while appearing hyperpolarized with BeRST (Figure 2 F"). The
hyperpolarization reported by BeRST is more consistent with established biophysical
models, suggesting that there is an artifact with VF2.1.Cl, but out of caution we resisted
interpreting any neurite patterns in this paper until this contradiction can be resolved.
In (Figure 2E-G") we have included a gallery of Vmem images of NC explants
stained with BeRST and cultured in parallel and imaged roughly 20 hours after plating.
FLIM produces two distinct datasets for each pixel. Intensity is a photon count and is the
standard readout for fluorescent confocal microscopy. Lifetime is a measurement of the
amount of time that the fluorophore remains in the excited state and is reported in
nanoseconds. We reported these data in three ways: First, intensity only, which showed
patterns as detected by standard bioelectric imaging (Figure 2 E-E""). Second, intensity
and lifetime combined, in which pixel brightness was determined by intensity and pixel
color is determined by lifetime (Figure 2F-F""). This is the default output of the LasX FLIM
module and combines the cell-shape cues provided by intensity, but obfuscates some of
the quantitative power of the lifetime data. Third, we have presented the lifetime image
masked by the intensity image and colored with a custom LUT (Figure 2G-G"). This
presentation technique was the most quantitative and best shows low-magnitude
patterns. In figures subsequent to Figure 2 we generally used the lifetime-only
presentation technique due to its quantitative power unless otherwise specified.
Together, these data demonstrate that FLIM enabled detection of subtle bioelectric
variation that was masked in intensity-only fluorescent bioelectric imaging. Further, they
underscore the dangers of 'false positive' bioelectric pattern detection with intensity-only
imaging that can largely be ameliorated with FLIM. However, they also reveale a
remarkable constellation of cell-to-cell bioelectric variation in explanted NCCs, especially
in cells that have split off from larger collectives. But how did this variation arise? Were
they evidence of transient fluctuations or persistent static cell differences? To address
these questions, we leveraged one of the main strengths of bioelectric imaging: the ability
to observe large populations of cells in parallel over extended periods of time.

Bioelectric variation in time: NCC explants exhibit multiscale bioelectric signals on scales
from seconds to hours
Having identified spatial variation in bioelectric state, we next asked how bioelectric
patterns evolve in time during neural crest cell migration and how these patterns respond
to bioelectric intervention by altering media K+ levels. Bioelectric imaging greatly improved
the temporal and spatial range over which we could detect bioelectric patterns. We
leveraged this sensitivity window to explore Vmem dynamics over a roughly 17-hour
window as the neural crest explants spread out, migrate collectively, and begin to
separate off from their collective to migrate individually.


[PAGE 12] As we outlined in Figure1B, one of the greatest challenges in the field of
bioelectricity is predicting phenotypic outcomes of bioelectric interventions. Do cells
compensate quickly to interventions return to a set Vmem, or do they remained de- or
hyperpolarized for extended time periods? Are bioelectric dynamics tightly clamped,
potentially preventing cells from transitioning into new states, or simply shifted to de- or
hyperpolarized levels? To address these questions, we ran parallel longitudinal studies of
NCC explants with altered external potassium levels to test the effects of extracellular ion
levels on long-term bioelectric patterns. We performed a bulk lifetime analysis on the
explant timelapses to estimate global Vmem patterns over time by thresholding the
Intensity component of the image to remove dim pixels from our analysis. Because this
approach does not require image segmentation it is relatively unbiased, but is more
sensitive to artifacts like those generated by cell death and dye internalization.
We first wanted to see whether we could detect effects of changing K+ levels on
BeRST lifetime. We determined the average value of each explant over the timecourse
and found that, as expected[116], increasing K+ increased Vmem (Figure 3A)
Unexpectedly, decreasing K+ levels did not significantly decrease lifetime (Figure 3A).
Plotting the mean value at each timepoint suggested that the standard deviation of the
0.5 mM K+ condition is larger than the other two conditions.
In all three conditions, Vmem followed a consistent 3-Phase pattern over time
(Figure 3B). When the data from all three conditions are pooled each phase was
statistically distinct from its previous phase. Initially the explants appear relatively
depolarized, followed by a roughly 6.5 hour period of gradual hyperpolarization. This
depolarization generally manifested as bioelectric gradient with the center of the explant
appearing relatively depolarized with increased polarization towards the explant periphery
(Supplemental movie 1). This central depolarization tends to flatten during this 6.5 hour
period as the explant hyperpolarizes. The initial hyperpolarization window is followed by
gradual depolarization over the next 10 or so hours, with Phase 3 not being significantly
different from Phase 1.
Phase 2 and 3 explants in 8.5 mM K+ had significantly higher Vmem than explants
in 4.5 mM K+, while in Phase 1 none of the conditions were significantly different
(Supplemental Figure 1). This pattern was evident in Figure 2B, as the gap between the
mean of the 8.5 mM K+ explants and the 4.5 mM K+ explants starts small in Phase 1,
expands in Phase 2 and remains large in Phase 3. These trends were consistent with an
intrinsic variation in K+ permeability as cells progress through migration.
To better explore the unexpected lack of Vmem reduction in the 0.5mM K+
condition, and informed by the relatively large standard deviation in this condition (Figure
3D) we examined the long-term dynamics of each explant independently (Figure 3D-F).
These independent observations revealed relatively short, sharp depolarization events
that are most prominent in the 0.5mM condition (Figure 3D, red asterisk) and seem most
evident during Phase 2. Because these signals were relatively rapid (minutes) and
appeared to be discrete events, as defined by a changing time much faster than the
duration of the constant periods between, we refer to them as 'digital' to differentiate them
from the slow (on the order of hours) 'analog' bioelectric signals. These signals
confounded attempts to determine the resting membrane potential of cells in the 0.5 mM
K+ condition, explaining the high standard deviation in this condition and potentially
explaining why it does not have significantly lower Vmem than the 4.5mM K+ condition.


[PAGE 13] Closer qualitative analysis of these digital signals revealed that they often involved
a large number of cells, but did not necessarily encompass the entire explant. In the
example low K+ treated explant in Figure 4A and B has split into two fragments (see
Supplemental movie 1 for full video). In Panel B, the bottom fragment depolarized as a
collective while the upper fragment remained relatively constant. 14 minutes later, in
panel H, the upper fragment collectively depolarized while the lower fragment gradually
hyperpolarized. This trend suggested that these two fragments contain separate dynamic
bioelectric circuits. We have also provided two more examples with combined Vmem and
intensity to show the diversity of digital bioelectric signals (Supplemental Movies 2 and
3).
Taken together, these data revealed a slow, 3-phase progression of Vmem during
NC explant spreading: an early, relatively depolarized phase characterized by a
depolarized center that gradually becomes more hyperpolarized toward the periphery
(Phase 1), a second more hyperpolarized phase in which this gradient weakens during
which cells begin to separate from the explant (Phase 2), and third phase of increasing
depolarization (Phase 3). Together these data suggested that membrane K+ permeability
shifts as NCC migration progresses. Finally, we identified an unexpected increase in fast,
short duration depolarization events in the low K+ condition, demonstrating that even very
simple bioelectric interventions may have nonlinear phenotypic consequences.

Digital bioelectric dynamics partially overlap with calcium dynamics
In neurons, calcium dynamics are strongly correlated with depolarization [90, 91].
We compared Vmem and calcium patterns in order to determine if this is true in the NC
as well.
Calcium signaling is one of the best-studied dynamic signaling paradigms in non-
neural biology [117, 118], and it has regularly been used as a proxy for dynamic neural
signals for decades [90, 91, 119]. It has further been found to be active during NC explant
migration and patterning [120, 121] and disruption of the Ca2+/H+ channel AMO1 [68],
and the nonspecific cation channel Piezo1 prevents normal NCC migration in vivo [69].
Given this correlation between dynamic neural signals and calcium, we hypothesized that
the digital bioelectric signals we describe in the previous section are an undescribed
component of the dynamic non-neural calcium paradigm.
We analyzed our timeseries for evidence of correlation between bioelectric and
calcium signals, and as we hypothesized, we found examples of calcium signals that
correlate with bioelectric signals (Figure 4C). However, we also observed bioelectric
events with no corresponding calcium signal (Figure 4D) and calcium signals without
corresponding bioelectric signals (Figure 4D). Given these data, we rejected the
hypothesis that calcium can be a sufficient proxy for developmental bioelectricity, and
instead concluded that bioelectric and calcium signals are crosstalk with one another, but
lack the tight correlation canonically found in neural bioelectricity.
To more holistically compare calcium and digital bioelectric dynamics we turned to
kymography (Figure 5 A-O). Because analog and digital bioelectric signals differ by the
relative rate of their signal changes, we deconvolved them by creating 'positive derivative'
timeseries by subtracting the Vmem lifetime (or calcium intensity) values at each
timepoint from the following timepoint. Kymographs produced from the undifferentiated

Closer qualitative analysis of these digital signals revealed that they often involved
a large number of cells, but did not necessarily encompass the entire explant. In the
example low K+ treated explant in Figure 4A and B has split into two fragments (see
Supplemental movie 1 for full video). In Panel B, the bottom fragment depolarized as a
collective while the upper fragment remained relatively constant. 14 minutes later, in
panel H, the upper fragment collectively depolarized while the lower fragment gradually
hyperpolarized. This trend suggested that these two fragments contain separate dynamic
bioelectric circuits. We have also provided two more examples with combined Vmeme and
intensity to show the diversity of digital bioelectric signals (Supplemental Movies 2 and
3).

Taken together, these data revealed a slow, 3-phase progression of Vmem during
NC explant spreading: an early, relatively depolarized phase characterized by a
depolarized center that gradually becomes more hyperpolarized toward the periphery
(Phase 1), a second more hyperpolarized phase in which this gradient weakens during
which cells begin to separate from the explant (Phase 2), and third phase of increasing
depolarization (Phase 3). Together these data suggested that membrane K+ permeability
shifts as NCC migration progresses. Finally, we identified an unexpected increase in fast,
short duration depolarization events in the low K+ condition, demonstrating that even very
simple bioelectric interventions may have nonlinear phenotypic consequences.

Digital bioelectric dynamics partially overlap with calcium dynamics

In neurons, calcium dynamics are strongly correlated with depolarization [90, 91].
We compared Vmeme and calcium patterns in order to determine if this is true in the NC
as well.

Calcium signaling is one of the best-studied dynamic signaling paradigms in non-
neural biology [117, 118], and it has regularly been used as a proxy for dynamic neural
signals for decades [90, 91, 119]. It has further been found to be active during NC explant
migration and patterning [120, 121] and disruption of the Ca2+/H+ channel AMO1 [68],
and the nonspecific cation channel Piezo1 prevents normal NCC migration in vivo [69].
Given this correlation between dynamic neural signals and calcium, we hypothesized that
the digital bioelectric signals we describe in the previous section are an undescribed
component of the dynamic non-neural calcium paradigm.

We analyzed our timeseries for evidence of correlation between bioelectric and
calcium signals, and as we hypothesized, we found examples of calcium signals that
correlate with bioelectric signals (Figure 4C). However, we also observed bioelectric
events with no corresponding calcium signal (Figure 4D) and calcium signals without
corresponding bioelectric signals (Figure 4D). Given these data, we rejected the
hypothesis that calcium can be a sufficient proxy for developmental bioelectricity, and
instead concluded that bioelectric and calcium signals are crosstalk with one another, but
lack the tight correlation canonically found in neural bioelectricity.

To more holistically compare calcium and digital bioelectric dynamics we turned to
kymography (Figure 5 A-O). Because analog and digital bioelectric signals differ by the
relative rate of their signal changes, we deconvolved them by creating 'positive derivative'
timeseries by subtracting the Vmeme lifetime (or calcium intensity) values at each
timepoint from the following timepoint. Kymographs produced from the undifferentiated
image (Figure 5 D,H,L) showed the analog system dynamics, while kymographs of the
positive derivative image reveal the digital dynamics (Figure 5 E,I,M).

We generated positive derivative timeseries by using the NucBlue nuclear signal
to mask the timeseries and remove all datapoints outside of the nucleus ROI. This
thresholding served two purposes: it removed much of the internalized dye that accrues
within cells over time as the vesicles housing this dye tend to be occluded by the nucleus,
and it removed noise from cell movement which is a substantial confound for this positive
derivative approach. We also used nuclear thresholding with the original images. We
then used the "Radial Reslice" tool in Fiji [108] to draw 360 kymographs (spaced 1 degree
apart) spanning the center of the image to its periphery (Figure 5A,B). Stacking these
360 kymographs into an average intensity projection produced a single image that
conveys dynamic information about the bioelectric evolution of the whole explant in space
and time.

We show representative kymographs from our three conditions in Figure 5 D-O.
The analog trends visualized by the undifferentiated kymographs aligned with the trends
we described in our whole-explant analysis (Figure 3): Initial depolarization followed by
hyperpolarization that eventually trended back to depolarization, a depolarization to
hyperpolarization gradient from the center of the explant to the periphery that gradually
faded, and a strong hyperpolarization in peripheral cells splitting off from the explant. The
effects of external K+ levels also aligned with the low K+ condition demonstrating stronger
hyperpolarization during Phase 2 and the 8.5mM K+ condition demonstrating higher
depolarization in Phase 3.

Examination of the kymographic datasets lead us to formulate two hypotheses: (1)
that Vmeme and calcium dynamics were weakly coordinated in migrating NCCs and (2)
that Vmeme dynamics tended to be larger in scale than calcium dynamics. To
quantitatively evaluate these hypotheses we applied well-established Information Theory
formalism using the tool CAIM (Calcium Imaging) [111], which we have previously used
to quantify Information flow in and between the calcium and cytoskeletal pathways in
Xenopus laevis animal cap cells[99].

We began by pooling Vmeme and calcium data from the 0.5mMK+, 4.5mMK+ and
8.5mMK+ conditions in an attempt to estimate the Informational properties of these
pathways throughout the spectrum of K+ levels they may encounter during development
and improve our statistical power. We determined an average information value for each
explant. In this pooled data we detect an average of 0.079 bits of Information in the Vmemoe
pathway and 0.062 bits detected in the calcium pathway (Figure 6B) though these values
are not significantly different.

Only about 7% of calcium Information is shared with Vmemoe

To test our hypothesis that calcium and Vmeme and calcium are weakly correlated
in migrating NCC explants we measured the Mutual Information between the two
variables within each ROI and compared it to the amount of Information measured in each
pathway. Consistent with our hypothesis Mutual Information between calcium and Vmemое
was significantly lower than either of the two variables (Figure 6B), only about 7% of the
Information measured in the calcium pathway and 5.6% of the Information measured in
Vmeme. These data suggest that the two pathways are largely, though not entirely,
independent in migrating NCCs.

Vmemºº events tend to be larger than calcium events

We observed that Vmeme events tend to be incorporate more cells than calcium
signaling events. To test this, we used the binarized ROI data generated for the CAIM
analysis above and measured the average number of ROIs included in events of each
signaling paradigm. Explants not exhibiting both calcium and bioelectric events were
excluded from this analysis, and the number of events was not considered, only the
average size of the detected events. Each datapoint represents the average event size
for the indicated paradigm for one explant, and the K+ condition to which the explant
belongs is indicated by the datapoint color.

Survey of rare bioelectric events implies cytological bioelectric decision making

The expanded spatial and temporal range of bioelectric imaging (Figure 2D) allows
us to capture relatively rare events that would be extremely challenging to catch with
classic needle-based electrophysiology. The relative rarity of spontaneous occurrence of
these events has prevented us from drawing quantitative conclusions about them at this
time, but should provide a foundation for future study while underscoring the fascinating
complexity of the bioelectric world.

Vmeme increases during cell division

Bioelectricity has been implicated both phenomenologically and functionally in
many aspects of the cell cycle [28, 122-124]. In Supplemental Movie 4 we document
several events of depolarization during cell division, one of which is shown in Figure 7A.
This observation aligns with previously described bioelectric cell cycle patterns [125],
reinforcing the ability of the VF-FLIM technique to detect previously established bioelectric
events. Further, the minimal invasiveness of bioelectric imaging coupled with its high
temporal and spatial resolution provides an appeal platform to tease apart the bioelectric
mechanisms of cell cycle progression.

Cells and cell collective depolarize upon re-encountering their original collective

In Supplemental Movie 5, we observed a cell hyperpolarize, break off from the
collective, and migrate independently before contacting another location in the explant,
depolarizing (Figure 8B), and integrating into this new location. Contact appears to be
mediated by tunneling nanotubes [121, 126-132]. We have also observed this
phenomenon with cell collectives, which depolarize in unison when the most proximal
member of the group re-contacts the greater collective Supplemental Movies 6 and 7.
This immediate, long distance response points to a role for contact-mediated bioelectric
signaling in balancing the rate and degree of spreading during NCC migration, though
further study will be needed to evaluate its functionality.

Scan artifacts reveal dynamic signal kinetics

We have observed that in explants raised for roughly 22 hours at 18 degrees,
switching from 4.5mM K+ to 0.5mM K+ appears to stimulate bioelectric signals similar to
those observed in Phase 2 of imaged over time at 20 degrees. We leveraged this
observation to survey for fast bioelectric events at increased magnification (Supplemental
movies 2 and 3). Under these conditions we occasionally observed straight lines of
depolarization perfectly parallel to the y-imaging axis. Because we are performing line-
scanning imaging we interpret these lines as digital bioelectric events that manifest
between successive scan lines. Assuming that these bioelectric events are consistent
across the cell we can use the line-scan rate across an ROI parallel to the x-axis to
estimate the kinetics of the bioelectric signal. We find that these signals can be repetitive
and have relatively fast on-kinetics and slow off-kinetics (Figure 9C', C"). The frequency
of these signals varies from cell-to-cell, suggesting a diversity in the underlying ion
channel mechanism, though they tend to persist for on-the-order of seconds. Notably the
cell in C' was in direct contact with several neurite-like projections, presenting the
possibility that neuronal activity may play a role in producing or modulating some of these
digital bioelectric signals.

Strikingly, we found that these digital bioelectric events can span long ranges in
cell collectives, and even propagate to cells outside of the core collective and presumably
linked only by tunneling nanotubes (Figure 7C"). By assuming uniform activation across
the collective in this case we can estimate the collective digital bioelectric signal kinetics
and find a third bioelectric pattern distinct from the ones in C' and C". The diversity in on
and off kinetics of these signals provides a tantalizing glimpse into the temporal encoding
of non-neural bioelectric events, though the relative rarity of these events precludes
deeper interpretation without further experimental optimization.

Bioelectric activity of NC explant projections

Because it stains the cell membrane, BeRST effectively highlights tunneling
nanotubes and other cellular projections that have a high ratio of cell membrane to
cytoplasm. Such projections have been shown to be able to mediate long-distance
communication [129], including bioelectric communication via gap junctions [126, 128].
In rare cases like that shown in Figure 7D we observed that depolarization of the cell body
extends to its tunneling nanotubes. Notably the tunneling nanotubes of multiple cells
depolarize in unison suggesting that the bioelectric reach of the cell collective is much
greater than the space occupied by the cell bodies might suggest. This is consistent with
our finding of relatively high mutual information in the Vmem pathway compared with the
calcium pathway. More generally the small size of tunneling nanotubes makes them
exceedingly difficult to clamp with existing technology, and this finding demonstrates that
bioelectric imaging may be a powerful tool for better understanding their dynamics.

[PAGE 17] Discussion

The Rosetta stone's value stemmed primarily from its revelation of both similarities
and differences between ancient and modern languages. Likewise, we analyze NCCs to
reveal both similarities and differences between neural signaling and non-neural and
neural bioelectric signals. We describe some key pitfalls in bioelectric imaging and
discuss how FLIM can be used to circumvent them. We then describe long-period analog
bioelectric patterns that manifest over the course of hours and much faster digital
bioelectric signals that manifest on the order of seconds. We then apply information
theory to demonstrate that, unlike action potentials [90, 91], these digital bioelectric signals
are mostly distinct from calcium dynamics. Finally, we discuss the implications for these
comparisons to the ontogeny of neural bioelectricity.


The value of FLIM in revealing bioelectric patterns

Perhaps the most generally applicable finding of this paper is the danger of using
intensity-only measurements to detect bioelectric patterns. The high level of confounding
noise both obscures subtle bioelectric patterns (compare Figure 2C' and 2D') and, even
more problematically, can appear as false-positive signal (compare Figure 2 C" and D").
Due to the necessity of long-term imaging for our approach, we were limited in our ability
to detect contamination from NCC-proximal tissues or differentiation of multipotent NCCS
into any of the many types of cells to which they give rise. Our work reveals a striking
variety in bioelectric signals during NCC migration and provides a foundation for future
studies to deconvolve the phenomenological and functional nature of contributions of
inter-tissue interactions, cell differentiation and crosstalk between different NCC
derivatives to the NCC bioelectric code. Applications of understanding the roles of ionic
signaling for orchestrating cell behavior more broadly extend across evolutionary
developmental biology [102, 133], the biomedicine of birth defects and injury [41, 134,
135], and the use of diverse cell types in programmable biorobotics [136].

The analog bioelectric code

Migrating explanted cells follow a slow three-phase bioelectric trajectory that
manifests over a series of hours. (Figure 3A-G, Supplemental Movie 1). In Phase I a
strong gradient with more depolarized cells on the inside and more hyperpolarized cells
on the outside. In Phase II this gradient weakens as the whole explant hyperpolarizes
and begins to break apart. Finally, in Phase III the explants again depolarize. While these
trends are consistent, the actual estimated bioelectric values vary considerably between
explants indicating a lack of fixed gating setpoints lead us to refer to these as "analog"
signals.

Effects of K+ concentration on bioelectric dynamics of NCC explants

How do bioelectric interventions affect bioelectric signals? One of the biggest
challenges in the field of bioelectricity is designing bioelectric interventions that reliably
produce desired phenotypic outcomes (Figure 1). Doing so is necessary for therapeutic
intervention in regeneration and cancer treatment [137, 138]. Here, we took steps to
bridge this gap by measuring the effects of a common bioelectric intervention, variation
of extracellular K+ levels, over an extended period of time. As predicted from previous

[PAGE 17] Discussion
The Rosetta stone's value stemmed primarily from its revelation of both similarities
and differences between ancient and modern languages. Likewise, we analyze NCCs to
reveal both similarities and differences between neural signaling and non-neural and
neural bioelectric signals. We describe some key pitfalls in bioelectric imaging and
discuss how FLIM can be used to circumvent them. We then describe long-period analog
bioelectric patterns that manifest over the course of hours and much faster digital
bioelectric signals that manifest on the order of seconds. We then apply information
theory to demonstrate that, unlike action potentials [90, 91], these digital bioelectric signals
are mostly distinct from calcium dynamics. Finally, we discuss the implications for these
comparisons to the ontogeny of neural bioelectricity.

The value of FLIM in revealing bioelectric patterns
Perhaps the most generally applicable finding of this paper is the danger of using
intensity-only measurements to detect bioelectric patterns. The high level of confounding
noise both obscures subtle bioelectric patterns (compare Figure 2C' and 2D') and, even
more problematically, can appear as false-positive signal (compare Figure 2 C" and D").
Due to the necessity of long-term imaging for our approach, we were limited in our ability
to detect contamination from NCC-proximal tissues or differentiation of multipotent NCCS
into any of the many types of cells to which they give rise. Our work reveals a striking
variety in bioelectric signals during NCC migration and provides a foundation for future
studies to deconvolve the phenomenological and functional nature of contributions of
inter-tissue interactions, cell differentiation and crosstalk between different NCC
derivatives to the NCC bioelectric code. Applications of understanding the roles of ionic
signaling for orchestrating cell behavior more broadly extend across evolutionary
developmental biology [102, 133], the biomedicine of birth defects and injury [41, 134,
135], and the use of diverse cell types in programmable biorobotics [136].

The analog bioelectric code
Migrating explanted cells follow a slow three-phase bioelectric trajectory that
manifests over a series of hours. (Figure 3A-G, Supplemental Movie 1). In Phase I a
strong gradient with more depolarized cells on the inside and more hyperpolarized cells
on the outside. In Phase II this gradient weakens as the whole explant hyperpolarizes
and begins to break apart. Finally, in Phase III the explants again depolarize. While these
trends are consistent, the actual estimated bioelectric values vary considerably between
explants indicating a lack of fixed gating setpoints lead us to refer to these as "analog"
signals.

Effects of K+ concentration on bioelectric dynamics of NCC explants
How do bioelectric interventions affect bioelectric signals? One of the biggest
challenges in the field of bioelectricity is designing bioelectric interventions that reliably
produce desired phenotypic outcomes (Figure 1). Doing so is necessary for therapeutic
intervention in regeneration and cancer treatment [137, 138]. Here, we took steps to
bridge this gap by measuring the effects of a common bioelectric intervention, variation
of extracellular K+ levels, over an extended period of time. As predicted from previous

[PAGE 18] 
work [116], elevating extracellular K+ appears to depolarize cells. Reducing K+ does not
significantly hyperpolarize cells, however. We further found that reduction of extracellular
K+ lead to an unanticipated increase in fast 'digital' bioelectric signals demonstrating that
even simple bioelectric interventions can have major non-linear effects. The mechanisms
by which reduced K+ could increase digital bioelectric signaling remain unclear, though it
is of some interest that reduced K+ in the brain has been associated with sleep [139], and
thus our findings may have implications for the primitive evolutionary origins of sleep.

The digital bioelectric code
What role could digital bioelectric signals play? There is a growing body of
evidence that temporally encoded signaling dynamics are an underappreciated element
of signal transduction, with pulsed and static inputs of the same growth factor having
different effects. [140-143]. Given that neural bioelectric signals are fundamentally digital,
it follows that their more primitive non-neural counterparts would also have temporally
encoded properties. The variable off and on kinetics we report in Figure 7C provide
evidence for the tantalizing possibility that there may exist a temporally encoded
vocabulary of non-neural digital bioelectric signals. While the rarity of these events limits
our ability to study them, future work better characterizing may go a long way to
addressing our key knowledge gap of designing bioelectric interventions to achieve
specific outcomes.
There is also some evidence of this phenomenon in bioelectric signaling. Elegant
work employing fluorescence-fluctuation correlation analysis of the genetically encoded
voltage-indicator rEstus has shown that Vmem fluctuations can correlate between cells in
immortalized A375, HEK293T and MCF cell lines, and they report reduced Vmem variation
in confluent clusters [144]. The events that we describe are more discrete than the
fluctuations describe by Rühl et al. [144], and while we see spatial variation increase in
isolated cells, cells within collectives reliably produce robust digital signals. Further work
will be needed to determine if the digital bioelectric signals that we report are alternative
manifestations of the same phenomenon described by Rühl et al. or if they are separate
pathways.

How does digital Vmem and calcium signals compare in NCCs? Calcium and Vmem
are largely distinct informational channels in NCC explants, in a substantial departure
from the neural paradigm (Figure 8). This disparity highlights the danger of using calcium
as a proxy for Vmem in non-neural cells and underscores the importance of calcium-
independent effectors of bioelectric signals. Vmem signals exhibit mutual information at a
greater distances than calcium signals. This patterns aligns interestingly with the
specialized function of these channels in neurons, in which Vmem allows for fast long-
distance communication while calcium mediates the relatively local process of vesicle
release. Could the long-distance nature of the bioelectric signals that we see point to an
intermediary evolutionary mechanism that was supplanted by axons in the brain? Better
understanding the mechanistic origins of NCC digital signals may provide insights into the
early evolution of neural bioelectricity.

What is the molecular basis of digital bioelectric signals? Hyperpolarization
activated cyclic nucleotide gated channels (HCN) increase membrane cation conductivity
in response to hyperpolarization and have been shown to mediate long-range repair of
chemical and genetic perturbation of Xenopus development [46, 145, 146]. These

[PAGE 19]
channels are known to function in stem cells [147-149], excitatory cells including neurons
[150] and cardiomyocytes [151, 152], making them reasonable candidates for effectors of
the digital bioelectric signals we describe here. However, HCN channels are calcium
permeable, and digital bioelectric signals only loosely correlate with calcium dynamics.
Likewise, while the mechanosensitive nonspecific cation channel Piezo1 is necessary for
proper NCC migration [69], it too show allow calcium influx and thus it is an unlikely
effector for digital bioelectric signals. Our data therefore point to an alternative
hyperpolarization activated ion channels that can coordinate cell physiology over large
distances making these appealing targets for future studies of repair and regeneration.

Implications for the deep history of bioelectricity
Comparison of the bioelectric circuitry of comparatively primitive NCCs with the
more specialized, highly stereotyped circuitry of action potentials provides a tantalizing
glimpse into the early ontogeny of neuron specification. We show here that calcium and
Vmem dynamics have distinct computational capacities in neural crest cells, suggesting
that they existed as distinct phenomena very different from their textbook roles in neurons
during deep evolutionary time. Could some happy accident of the kinetics of the circuitry
produced by their unification be the spark that enabled evolution of the neuron and all
that followed? If so, a similar non-linear increase in computational power may be
synthetically attainable through directed engineering of other biological circuitry. Further
understanding the computational properties and semantics [1, 2, 8, 53, 153-158] of the
bioelectric code in both neural and non-neural cells will be foundational to the
development of a synthesis of behavioral and morphogenetic problem-solving in biology,
and the novel forms of computation it has the potential to unlock.

[PAGE 19] Acknowledgements
We gratefully acknowledge support via Grant 62212 from the John Templeton
Foundation and of a sponsored research agreement from Astonishing Labs. We thank
Evan Miller for his kind gift of VF2.1.CI, VF2.0.Cl and BeRST dyes, Erin Switzer for Animal
Husbandry support, Daniel Tom and Giulia Ossato for training with FLIM, and Julia Poirier
for help with the manuscript.

[PAGE 21] Figure 2: Neural crest explants exhibit remarkable spatial bioelectric variability
(A) In VoltageFluor dyes quenching electrons reduce fluorophore intensity and lifetime
when loaded into hyperpolarized cells. In depolarized cells, the electrons are drawn out
of the fluorophore, the quenching is relieved and both the intensity and lifetime of the dyes
are increased.
(B-D) Gallery of NC explants near the end of spreading, roughly 22 hours after explanting
raised at 18° С.
(B-B") Intensity-only images of the type produced by non-FLIM confocal fluorescent
imaging.
(C-C"") Intensity/Lifetime composite images in which intensity is reported by pixel
brightness and lifetime is reported by pixel lifetime.
(D-D"") Lifetime only images with background removed via masking using the Intensity
only image.
(E-G) Representative control explants comparing Vmem sensitive and Vmem insensitive VF
dyes.
(E) BeRST, which is the dye used throughout the rest of this paper. Asterix shows dense
tissue fragment which shows no sign of dye-density dependent quenching.
(F) VF2.1.Cl, a green dye that has been rigorously quantified with FLIM[95]. Asterix
shows dense fragment with evident dye-density dependent quenching.
(G) VF2.0.CI, a Vmem-insensitive control variant of VF2.1.Cl lacking the quencher that
confers Vmem sensitivity. Asterix shows dense fragment with evident dye-density
dependent quenching.

[PAGE 22] Figure 3: NC explants exhibit a three-phase pattern of long-term analog bioelectric
changes
(A) Increasing K+ by 4mM increases Vmeme, while decreasing K+ by 4mM does not
decrease Vmeme. Significance determined using Browne-Forsythe and Welch ANOVA
tests with Dunnett's T3 multiple comparison test in Prism. Large datapoint represent
average values over the complete timecourse for a single explant (used to determine
statistical significance), and small datapoints represent individual timepoints. Different
colors represent different clutches. Plot produced following [113]. Line at mean, Error
bar = 95% confidence interval.
(B) Mean whole-explant lifetime over time displayed with SD. Vertical lines demarcate
Phases.

[PAGE 23] (C) Vmem decreases from Phase 1 to Phase 2, then increases from Phase 2 to Phase3
in timeseries pooled from all 3 K+ conditions. Datapoints represent mean Vmeme values
of a single explant during indicated Phase. Datapoint color indicates K+ condition.
Significance determined with repeated Measures One-Way ANOVA with Tukey's multiple
comparison test in Prism. Line at mean, Error bar = 95% confidence interval.
(D-F) Traces of individual explants raised at different K+ concentrations over time.
Asterisk in D indicates increased dynamics during Phase 2 in 0.5 mM K+ condition.
(G) Representative image of NC explant raised in 4.5 mM K+ at the three different
bioelectric phases.

[PAGE 24] Figure 4: NC explants exhibit multicellular digital signals on the scale of minutes that only
partially correlate with calcium signaling
(A,B) Successive frames of intensity and lifetime images showing digital bioelectric
signals in NC explants. Asterisks indicate which fragment of the explant depolarizes
during the timeseries.
(C,D,E) Successive timepoints of BeRST intensity, Vmeme and jGCAMP8S reported
calcium dynamics. In C the apparent depolarization coincides with a calcium signaling
event, though not all depolarized cells exhibit a calcium response. D shows a calcium
event with no corresponding bioelectric event. E shows a bioelectric event with no
corresponding calcium event.

[PAGE 25] Figure 5: Kymograph analysis reveals distinct analog and digital bioelectric signals
(A) Screenshot of radial reslicing of a lifetime image after application of a nuclear mask
generated from Nuc Blue DNA stain signal.
(B) Resultant kymograph of a single radial spoke.

[PAGE 25] Figure 5: Kymograph analysis reveals distinct analog and digital bioelectric signals
(A) Screenshot of radial reslicing of a lifetime image after application of a nuclear mask
generated from Nuc Blue DNA stain signal.
(B) Resultant kymograph of a single radial spoke.

[PAGE 26] (C) Average intensity projection combining lifetime values at each radial spoke to produce
a composite representation of bioelectric activity in kymograph space.
(D-O) Representative kymographs of Vmemº® (D,H,L), the positive derivative of Vmemoe
(E,I,M) and calcium (F,J,N) and a merge of Vmeme and calcium (G,K,O) at different K+
concentrations.

[PAGE 26] Figure 6. Information analysis of calcium and Vmem channels shows they are distinct
paradigms that respond differently to changes in resting membrane potential
A. Movies are segmented into 15 concentric circles that are then used as ROIs for
Information (B) and object size analysis (C). Small events intersect a small number of
circles producing low Mutual Information values (A), while larger events cross many
circles to give high Mutual Information values (A').
B. The information contained in both the Vmeme and Calcium paradigms is greater than
the mutual information between them (Friedman test with Dunn's multiple comparison
post-test) Line at median, error bars = 95% confidence interval.
C. Bioelectric and calcium events were scored by the mean number of ROIs affected to
estimate event size. Events without at least one bioelectric and calcium event were
omitted. Significance determined via paired t-test to compare event size within each
explant. Line at median, error bars = 95% confidence interval.
Values for B and C were obtained by pooling datasets with spot color signifying K+ level:
0.5 mM K+ (blue), 4.5 mM K+ (green) and 8.5mM K+ (red).

[PAGE 27] Figure 7: Survey of rare bioelectric events
(A,B): NucBlue signal was used to separate the nucleus ROI from the cell body. BeRST
FLIM is shown in the nucleus ROI while BeRST intensity is shown in the cell body to show
Vmeme and cell shape clearly at the same time.
(A) Depolarization prior to cell division
(B) Depolarization of isolated cell upon re-contacting collective
(C) Measurement of vertical scan-line artifacts facilitates estimation the kinetics of
bioelectric events.
(D) Cellular projections appear to depolarize in concert with cell bodies.

[PAGE 28] Figure 8: Comparing neural and neural crest bioelectricity:
Unlike in neurons (A) in which Vmem and calcium are closely linked, in neural
crest cells (B) Vmem and calcium are largely separate pathways.

[PAGE 29] Supplemental Figures

[PAGE 29] Supplemental Figure 1: K+ has different effects on Vmeme at different phases of NCC
migration. The 8.5mM K+ condition has elevated lifetime compared with the other two
conditions in Phase 2 and 3, but not in Phase 1. Line at mean with 95% confidence
interval.

[PAGE 29] Supplemental Figures

Supplemental Figure 1: K+ has different effects on V_meme at different phases of NCC migration. The 8.5mM K+ condition has elevated lifetime compared with the other two conditions in Phase 2 and 3, but not in Phase 1. Line at mean with 95% confidence interval.

[PAGE 30] Supplemental Tables

Supplemental Table 1: Glossary of imaging conditions and imaging metafiles for each Figure and movie.

[PAGE 30] Supplemental Movie Legends:

Supplemental Movie 1: FLIM (Right) reveals bioelectric patterns at multiple timescales in migrating NC explants that are obscured by intensity only imaging. Fluorescent lifetime heatmap range displayed: 1.1ns to 1.3ns

Supplemental Movie 2: 40X magnification movie showing combined intensity and FLIM reveals diverse bioelectric dynamics of migrating NCCs. Fluorescent lifetime heatmap range displayed: 1 to 1.5 ns

Supplemental Movie 3: 40X magnification movie showing combined intensity and FLIM reveals diverse bioelectric dynamics of migrating NCCs. Fluorescent lifetime heatmap range displayed:1 to 1.5 ns

Supplemental Movie 4: Optically estimated depolarization accompanying cell division. Colored nuclear ROI shows Vmeme, while extra-nuclear greyscale BeRST intensity shows cell morphology. Fluorescent lifetime heatmap range displayed: 1.1 to 1.4ns

[PAGE 31] Supplemental Movie 5: A cell departs the collective while hyperpolarizing, migrates independently, then depolarizes upon re-joining the collective. Fluorescent lifetime heatmap range displayed: 0.800ns to 1.400ns

Supplemental Movie 6: A group of cells hyperpolarizes and departs the collective, migrates as a separate collective, then depolarizes when re-contacting the larger collective. Fluorescent lifetime heatmap range displayed: 0.9 to 1.3ns

Supplemental Movie 7: Colored nuclear ROI shows Vmemºº, while extra-nuclear greyscale BeRST intensity shows cell morphology. CellProfiler was used to identify nuclei and the dilate function was used to draw a one pixel thick black line surrounding them. Fluorescent lifetime heatmap range displayed: 0.9 to 1.3ns

21. Cao, L., et al., Endogenous bioelectric currents promote differentiation of the
mammalian lens. J Cell Physiol, 2018. 233(3): p. 2202-2212.
22. van Vliet, P., et al., Hyperpolarization induces differentiation in human
cardiomyocyte progenitor cells. Stem Cell Rev, 2010. 6(2): p. 178-85.
23. Konig, S., et al., The calcineurin pathway links hyperpolarization (Kir2.1)-induced
Ca2+ signals to human myoblast differentiation and fusion. Development, 2006.
133(16): p. 3107-14.
24. Konig, S., et al., Membrane hyperpolarization triggers myogenin and myocyte
enhancer factor-2 expression during human myoblast differentiation. J Biol Chem,
2004. 279(27): p. 28187-96.
25. Bhavsar, M.B., et al., Role of Bioelectricity During Cell Proliferation in Different Cell
Types. Front Bioeng Biotechnol, 2020. 8: p. 603.
26. Piggott, B.J., et al., Paralytic, the Drosophila voltage-gated sodium channel,
regulates proliferation of neural progenitors. Genes Dev, 2019. 33(23-24): p. 1739-
1750.
27. Ding, F., et al., Involvement of cationic channels in proliferation and migration of
human mesenchymal stem cells. Tissue & cell, 2012. 44(6): p. 358-64.
28. Blackiston, D.J., K.A. McLaughlin, and M. Levin, Bioelectric controls of cell
proliferation: ion channels, membrane voltage and the cell cycle. Cell Cycle, 2009.
8(21): p. 3519-28.
29. Petsakou, A. and N. Perrimon, Bioelectric regulation of intestinal stem cells. Trends
Cell Biol, 2022.
30. Thomas, C.F., et al., Voltage-gated sodium channel activity mediates sea urchin
larval skeletal patterning through spatial regulation of Wnt5 expression.
Development, 2023. 150(10).
31. Pai, V.P., et al., Genome-wide analysis reveals conserved transcriptional responses
downstream of resting potential change in Xenopus embryos, axolotl regeneration,
and human mesenchymal cell differentiation. Regeneration (Oxf), 2016. 3(1): p. 3-
25.
32. Spannl, S., et al., Glycolysis regulates Hedgehog signalling via the plasma
membrane potential. EMBO J, 2021. 40(7): p. e107925.
33. Borodinsky, L.N. and Y.H. Belgacem, Crosstalk among electrical activity, trophic
factors and morphogenetic proteins in the regulation of neurotransmitter phenotype
specification. J Chem Neuroanat, 2016. 73: p. 3-8.
34. Borodinsky, L.N., et al., Spatiotemporal integration of developmental cues in neural
development. Dev Neurobiol, 2015. 75(4): p. 349-59.
35. Belgacem, Y.H. and L.N. Borodinsky, Inversion of Sonic hedgehog action on its
canonical pathway by electrical activity. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA, 2015. 112(13): p.
4140-5.
36. Pai, V.P., et al., Transmembrane voltage potential controls embryonic eye patterning
in Xenopus laevis. Development (Cambridge, England), 2012. 139(2): p. 313-323.
37. Bates, E., Ion Channels in Development and Cancer. Annual Review of Cell and
Developmental Biology, 2015. 31(1): p. 231-247.
38. Perathoner, S., et al., Bioelectric signaling regulates size in zebrafish fins. PLoS
Genet, 2014. 10(1): p. e1004080.
39. Pitcairn, E., et al., Coordinating heart morphogenesis: A novel role for
Hyperpolarization-activated cyclic nucleotide-gated (HCN) channels during
cardiogenesis in Xenopus laevis. Communicative & Integrative Biology, 2017. 10(3):
p. e1309488.
40. Pai, V.P., et al., Endogenous Gradients of Resting Potential Instructively Pattern
Embryonic Neural Tissue via Notch Signaling and Regulation of Proliferation. The
Journal of Neuroscience, 2015. 35(10): p. 4366-85.
41. Adams, D.S., et al., Bioelectric signalling via potassium channels: a mechanism for
craniofacial dysmorphogenesis in KCNJ2-associated Andersen-Tawil Syndrome. J
Physiol, 2016. 594(12): p. 3245-3270.
42. Vandenberg, L.N., R.D. Morrie, and D.S. Adams, V-ATPase-dependent ectodermal
voltage and pH regionalization are required for craniofacial morphogenesis. Dev
Dyn, 2011. 240(8): p. 1889-904.
43. Daane, J.M., et al., Modulation of bioelectric cues in the evolution of flying fishes.
Current Biology, 2021. 31(22): p. 5052-5061.e8.
44. Tseng, A.S., et al., Induction of vertebrate regeneration by a transient sodium
current. J Neurosci, 2010. 30(39): p. 13192-200.
45. Adams, D.S., A.S. Tseng, and M. Levin, Light-activation of the Archaerhodopsin H(+)-
pump reverses age-dependent loss of vertebrate regeneration: sparking system-
level controls in vivo. Biol Open, 2013. 2(3): p. 306-13.
46. Pai, V.P. and M. Levin, HCN2 channel-induced rescue of brain, eye, heart and gut
teratogenesis caused by nicotine, ethanol and aberrant notch signalling. Wound
Repair Regen, 2022. 30(6): p. 681-706.
47. Chernet, B.T. and M. Levin, Transmembrane voltage potential is an essential cellular
parameter for the detection and control of tumor development in a Xenopus model.
Disease models & mechanisms, 2013. 6(3): p. 595-607.
48. Chernet, B.T., C. Fields, and M. Levin, Long-range gap junctional signaling controls
oncogene-mediated tumorigenesis in Xenopus laevis embryos. Front Physiol, 2014.
5: p. 519.
49. Lobikin, M., et al., Resting potential, oncogene-induced tumorigenesis, and
metastasis: the bioelectric basis of cancer in vivo. Phys Biol, 2012. 9(6): p. 065002.
50. Chernet, B.T., et al., Use of genetically encoded, light-gated ion translocators to
control tumorigenesis. Oncotarget, 2016. 7(15): p. 19575-19588.
51. Balasubramanian, S., et al., Electroceuticals: emerging applications beyond the
nervous system and excitable tissues. Trends in Pharmacological Sciences, 2024.
45(5): p. 391-394.
52. Kofman, K. and M. Levin, Bioelectric pharmacology of cancer: A systematic review
of ion channel drugs affecting the cancer phenotype. Prog Biophys Mol Biol, 2024.
191: p. 25-39.
53. Levin, M. and C.J. Martyniuk, The bioelectric code: An ancient computational
medium for dynamic control of growth and form. Biosystems, 2018. 164: p. 76-93.
54. Hotary, K.B. and K.R. Robinson, Endogenous electrical currents and the resultant
voltage gradients in the chick embryo. Dev Biol, 1990. 140(1): p. 149-60.
55. Robinson, K.R., The responses of cells to electrical fields: a review. J Cell Biol, 1985.
101(6): p. 2023-7.
56. Cooper, M.S. and R.E. Keller, Perpendicular orientation and directional migration of
amphibian neural crest cells in DC electrical fields. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA, 1984.
81(1): p. 160-4.
57. Stump, R.F. and K.R. Robinson, Xenopus neural crest cell migration in an applied
electrical field. Journal of Cell Biology, 1983. 97(4): p. 1226-1233.
58. Bronner-Fraser, M., Neural crest cell migration in the developing embryo. Trends Cell
Biol, 1993. 3(11): p. 392-7.
59. Trainor, P.A., Making headway: the roles of Hox genes and neural crest cells in
craniofacial development. ScientificWorldJournal, 2003. 3: p. 240-64.
60. Mayor, R. and M.J. Aybar, Induction and development of neural crest in Xenopus
laevis. Cell Tissue Res, 2001. 305(2): p. 203-9.
61. Fuchs, S. and L. Sommer, The neural crest: understanding stem cell function in
development and disease. Neurodegener Dis, 2007. 4(1): p. 6-12.
62. Lo, C.W., et al., Cx43 gap junction gene expression and gap junctional
communication in mouse neural crest cells. Dev Genet, 1997. 20(2): p. 119-32.
63. Lo, C.W., K.L. Waldo, and M.L. Kirby, Gap junction communication and the
modulation of cardiac neural crest cells. Trends Cardiovasc Med, 1999. 9(3-4): p.
63-9.
64. Stump, R.F. and K.R. Robinson, Xenopus neural crest cell migration in an applied
electrical field. J Cell Biol, 1983. 97(4): p. 1226-33.
65. Gruler, H. and R. Nuccitelli, Neural crest cell galvanotaxis: new data and a novel
approach to the analysis of both galvanotaxis and chemotaxis. Cell Motil
Cytoskeleton, 1991. 19(2): p. 121-33.
66. Adams, D.S., et al., Bioelectric signalling via potassium channels: a mechanism for
craniofacial dysmorphogenesis in KCNJ2-associated Andersen-Tawil Syndrome. J
Physiol, 2016. 594(12): p. 3245-70.
67. Belus, M.T., et al., Kir2.1 is important for efficient BMP signaling in mammalian face
development. Dev Biol, 2018. 444 Suppl 1 (Suppl 1): p. S297-s307.
68. Melchionda, M., et al., Ca2+/H+ exchange by acidic organelles regulates cell
migration in vivo. J Cell Biol, 2016. 212(7): p. 803-13.
69. Canales Coutiño, B. and R. Mayor, The mechanosensitive channel Piezo1
cooperates with semaphorins to control neural crest migration. Development, 2021.
148(23).
70. Shellard, A. and R. Mayor, Rules of collective migration: from the wildebeest to the
neural crest. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci, 2020. 375(1807): p. 20190387.
71. Barriga, E.H. and E. Theveneau, In vivo Neural Crest Cell Migration Is Controlled by
"Mixotaxis". Frontiers in Physiology, 2020. 11.
72. Theveneau, E. and C. Linker, Leaders in collective migration: are front cells really
endowed with a particular set of skills? F1000Res, 2017. 6: p. 1899.
73. Theveneau, E., et al., Chase-and-run between adjacent cell populations promotes
directional collective migration. Nat Cell Biol, 2013. 15(7): p. 763-72.
74. Theveneau, E. and R. Mayor, Can mesenchymal cells undergo collective cell
migration? The case of the neural crest. Cell Adhesion and Migration, 2011. 5(6): p.
490-498.
75. Theveneau, E. and R. Mayor, Collective cell migration of the cephalic neural crest:
the art of integrating information. Genesis, 2011. 49(4): p. 164-76.
76. Hartmann, J. and R. Mayor, Self-organized collective cell behaviors as design
principles for synthetic developmental biology. Semin Cell Dev Biol, 2023. 141: p.
63-73.
77. Theveneau, E., et al., Collective Chemotaxis Requires Contact-Dependent Cell
Polarity. Developmental Cell, 2010. 19(1): p. 39-53.
78. Shellard, A., et al., Supracellular contraction at the rear of neural crest cell groups
drives collective chemotaxis. Science, 2018. 362(6412): p. 339-343.
79. James, W., The principles of psychology, Vol I. The principles of psychology, Vol I.
1890, New York, NY, US: Henry Holt and Co. xii, 697-xii, 697.
80. Couly, G., et al., The regeneration of the cephalic neural crest, a problem revisited:
the regenerating cells originate from the contralateral or from the anterior and
posterior neural fold. Development, 1996. 122(11): p. 3393-407.
81. Le Douarin, N.M., et al., Neural crest cell plasticity and its limits. Development,
2004. 131(19): p. 4637-50.
82. Little, G.E., et al., Specificity and plasticity of thalamocortical connections in
Sema6A mutant mice. PLoS Biol, 2009. 7(4): p. e98.
83. Zarzosa, A., et al., Axolotls with an under- or oversupply of neural crest can regulate
the sizes of their dorsal root ganglia to normal levels. Dev Biol, 2014. 394(1): p. 65-
82.
84. Mitsiadis, T.A., et al., Development of teeth in chick embryos after mouse neural
crest transplantations. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA, 2003. 100(11): p. 6541-5.
85. McMillen, P. and M. Levin, Collective intelligence: A unifying concept for integrating
biology across scales and substrates. Commun Biol, 2024. 7(1): p. 378.
86. Vicente-Manzanares, M., et al., Non-muscle myosin II takes centre stage in cell
adhesion and migration. Nature Reviews Molecular Cell Biology, 2009. 10(11): p.
778-790.
87. Lazzari-Dean, J.R., A.M.M. Gest, and E.W. Miller, Measuring Absolute Membrane
Potential Across Space and Time. Annu Rev Biophys, 2021. 50: p. 447-468.
88. Adams, D.S. and M. Levin, Measuring resting membrane potential using the
fluorescent voltage reporters DiBAC4(3) and CC2-DMPE. Cold Spring Harbor
protocols, 2012. 2012(4): p. 459-64.
89. Adams, D.S. and M. Levin, General principles for measuring resting membrane
potential and ion concentration using fluorescent bioelectricity reporters. Cold
Spring Harbor protocols, 2012. 2012(4): p. 385-97.
90. Smetters, D., A. Majewska, and R. Yuste, Detecting action potentials in neuronal
populations with calcium imaging. Methods, 1999. 18(2): p. 215-21.
91. Yuste, R. and L.C. Katz, Control of postsynaptic Ca2+ influx in developing neocortex
by excitatory and inhibitory neurotransmitters. Neuron, 1991. 6(3): p. 333-44.
92. McMillen, P., R. Novak, and M. Levin, Toward Decoding Bioelectric Events in
Xenopus Embryogenesis: New Methodology for Tracking Interplay Between Calcium
and Resting Potentials In Vivo. J Mol Biol, 2020. 432(2): p. 605-620.
93. George, L.F. and E.A. Bates, Mechanisms Underlying Influence of Bioelectricity in
Development. Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology, 2022. 10.
94. Levin, M., G. Pezzulo, and J.M. Finkelstein, Endogenous Bioelectric Signaling
Networks: Exploiting Voltage Gradients for Control of Growth and Form. Annu Rev
Biomed Eng, 2017. 19: p. 353-387.
95. Lazzari-Dean, J.R., A.M.M. Gest, and E.W. Miller, Optical estimation of absolute
membrane potential using fluorescence lifetime imaging. eLife, 2019. 8: p. e44522.
96. Lazzari-Dean, J.R. and E.W. Miller, Optical Estimation of Absolute Membrane
Potential Using One- and Two-Photon Fluorescence Lifetime Imaging Microscopy.
Bioelectricity, 2021. 3(3): p. 197-203.
97. Huang, Y.L., A.S. Walker, and E.W. Miller, A Photostable Silicon Rhodamine Platform
for Optical Voltage Sensing. Journal of the American Chemical Society, 2015.
137(33): p. 10767-10776.
98. Shannon, C.E., A Mathematical Theory of Communication. Bell System Technical
Journal, 1948. 27(3): p. 379-423.
99. McMillen, P., S.I. Walker, and M. Levin, Information Theory as an Experimental Tool
for Integrating Disparate Biophysical Signaling Modules. Int J Mol Sci, 2022. 23(17).
100. Jekely, G., F. Keijzer, and P. Godfrey-Smith, An option space for early neural
evolution. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci, 2015. 370(1684).
101. de Wiljes, O.O., et al., Modeling spontaneous activity across an excitable
epithelium: Support for a coordination scenario of early neural evolution. Front
Comput Neurosci, 2015. 9: p. 110.
102. Keijzer, F., M. van Duijn, and P. Lyon, What nervous systems do: early evolution,
input-output, and the skin brain thesis. Adaptive Behavior, 2013. 21(2): p. 67-85.
103. Zhang, Y., et al., Fast and sensitive GCaMP calcium indicators for imaging neural
populations. Nature, 2023. 615(7954): p. 884-891.
104. Toettcher, J.E., O.D. Weiner, and W.A. Lim, Using optogenetics to interrogate the
dynamic control of signal transmission by the Ras/Erk module. Cell, 2013. 155(6): p.
1422-34.
105. Goedhart, J., et al., Structure-guided evolution of cyan fluorescent proteins towards
a quantum yield of 93%. Nat Commun, 2012. 3: p. 751.
106. Gouignard, N., C. Rouvière, and E. Theveneau, Using Xenopus Neural Crest Explants
to Study Epithelial-Mesenchymal Transition, in The Epithelial-to Mesenchymal
Transition: Methods and Protocols, K. Campbell and E. Theveneau, Editors. 2021,
Springer US: New York, NY. p. 257-274.
107. Sater, A.K., R.A. Steinhardt, and R. Keller, Induction of neuronal differentiation by
planar signals in Xenopus embryos. Dev Dyn, 1993. 197(4): p. 268-80.
108. Schindelin, J., et al., Fiji: an open-source platform for biological-image analysis. Nat
Methods, 2012. 9(7): p. 676-82.

91. Yuste, R. and L.C. Katz, Control of postsynaptic Ca2+ influx in developing neocortex
by excitatory and inhibitory neurotransmitters. Neuron, 1991. 6(3): p. 333-44.
92. McMillen, P., R. Novak, and M. Levin, Toward Decoding Bioelectric Events in
Xenopus Embryogenesis: New Methodology for Tracking Interplay Between Calcium
and Resting Potentials In Vivo. J Mol Biol, 2020. 432(2): p. 605-620.
93. George, L.F. and E.A. Bates, Mechanisms Underlying Influence of Bioelectricity in
Development. Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology, 2022. 10.
94. Levin, M., G. Pezzulo, and J.M. Finkelstein, Endogenous Bioelectric Signaling
Networks: Exploiting Voltage Gradients for Control of Growth and Form. Annu Rev
Biomed Eng, 2017. 19: p. 353-387.
95. Lazzari-Dean, J.R., A.M.M. Gest, and E.W. Miller, Optical estimation of absolute
membrane potential using fluorescence lifetime imaging. eLife, 2019. 8: p. e44522.
96. Lazzari-Dean, J.R. and E.W. Miller, Optical Estimation of Absolute Membrane
Potential Using One- and Two-Photon Fluorescence Lifetime Imaging Microscopy.
Bioelectricity, 2021. 3(3): p. 197-203.
97. Huang, Y.L., A.S. Walker, and E.W. Miller, A Photostable Silicon Rhodamine Platform
for Optical Voltage Sensing. Journal of the American Chemical Society, 2015.
137(33): p. 10767-10776.
98. Shannon, C.E., A Mathematical Theory of Communication. Bell System Technical
Journal, 1948. 27(3): p. 379-423.
99. McMillen, P., S.I. Walker, and M. Levin, Information Theory as an Experimental Tool
for Integrating Disparate Biophysical Signaling Modules. Int J Mol Sci, 2022. 23(17).
100. Jekely, G., F. Keijzer, and P. Godfrey-Smith, An option space for early neural
evolution. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci, 2015. 370(1684).
101. de Wiljes, O.O., et al., Modeling spontaneous activity across an excitable
epithelium: Support for a coordination scenario of early neural evolution. Front
Comput Neurosci, 2015. 9: p. 110.
102. Keijzer, F., M. van Duijn, and P. Lyon, What nervous systems do: early evolution,
input-output, and the skin brain thesis. Adaptive Behavior, 2013. 21(2): p. 67-85.
103. Zhang, Y., et al., Fast and sensitive GCaMP calcium indicators for imaging neural
populations. Nature, 2023. 615(7954): p. 884-891.
104. Toettcher, J.E., O.D. Weiner, and W.A. Lim, Using optogenetics to interrogate the
dynamic control of signal transmission by the Ras/Erk module. Cell, 2013. 155(6): p.
1422-34.
105. Goedhart, J., et al., Structure-guided evolution of cyan fluorescent proteins towards
a quantum yield of 93%. Nat Commun, 2012. 3: p. 751.
106. Gouignard, N., C. Rouvière, and E. Theveneau, Using Xenopus Neural Crest Explants
to Study Epithelial-Mesenchymal Transition, in The Epithelial-to Mesenchymal
Transition: Methods and Protocols, K. Campbell and E. Theveneau, Editors. 2021,
Springer US: New York, NY. p. 257-274.
107. Sater, A.K., R.A. Steinhardt, and R. Keller, Induction of neuronal differentiation by
planar signals in Xenopus embryos. Dev Dyn, 1993. 197(4): p. 268-80.
108. Schindelin, J., et al., Fiji: an open-source platform for biological-image analysis. Nat
Methods, 2012. 9(7): p. 676-82.
109. Stirling, D.R., et al., CellProfiler 4: improvements in speed, utility and usability. BMC
Bioinformatics, 2021. 22(1): p. 433.
110. Lamprecht, M.R., D.M. Sabatini, and A.E. Carpenter, CellProfiler: free, versatile
software for automated biological image analysis. Biotechniques, 2007. 42(1): p. 71-
5.
111. Moore, D. and P. McMillen, CAIM: information analysis of imaging data. 2019.
112. Lazic, S.E., C.J. Clarke-Williams, and M.R. Munafò, What exactly is 'N' in cell culture
and animal experiments? PLoS Biol, 2018. 16(4): p. e2005282.
113. Lord, S.J., et al., SuperPlots: Communicating reproducibility and variability in cell
biology. Journal of Cell Biology, 2020. 219(6).
114. Motulsky, H.J. GraphPad Statistics Guide. [cited 2025 March 4]; Available from:
https://www.graphpad.com/guides/prism/latest/statistics/index.htm.
115. McMillen, P. and M. Levin, Optical Estimation of Bioelectric Patterns in Living
Embryos. Methods Mol Biol, 2024. 2745: p. 91-102.
116. Bonzanni, M., et al., Defined extracellular ionic solutions to study and manipulate
the cellular resting membrane potential. Biology Open, 2020. 9(1).
117. Brodskiy, P.A. and J.J. Zartman, Calcium as a signal integrator in developing
epithelial tissues. Phys Biol, 2018. 15(5): p. 051001.
118. Brodskiy, P.A., et al., Decoding Calcium Signaling Dynamics during Drosophila Wing
Disc Development. Biophys J, 2019. 116(4): p. 725-740.
119. Alivisatos, A.P., et al., The brain activity map project and the challenge of functional
connectomics. Neuron, 2012. 74(6): p. 970-4.
120. McKinney, M.C. and P.M. Kulesa, In vivo calcium dynamics during neural crest cell
migration and patterning using GCaMP3. Dev Biol, 2011. 358(2): p. 309-17.
121. McKinney, M.C., et al., Neural crest cell communication involves an exchange of
cytoplasmic material through cellular bridges revealed by photoconversion of
KikGR. Dev Dyn, 2011. 240(6): p. 1391-401.
122. Xu, X., et al., N-cadherin and Cx43alpha1 gap junctions modulates mouse neural
crest cell motility via distinct pathways. Cell Commun Adhes, 2001. 8(4-6): p. 321-4.
123. Barghouth, P.G., M. Thiruvalluvan, and N.J. Oviedo, Bioelectrical regulation of cell
cycle and the planarian model system. Biochimica et biophysica acta, 2015.
1848(10 Pt B): p. 2629-37.
124. Aprea, J. and F. Calegari, Bioelectric state and cell cycle control of mammalian
neural stem cells. Stem cells international, 2012. 2012: p. 816049.
125. Blackiston, D.J., Κ.Α. McLaughlin, and M. Levin, Bioelectric controls of cell
proliferation: lon channels, membrane voltage and the cell cycle. Cell Cycle, 2009.
8(21): p. 3527-3536.
126. Wang, X., et al., Animal cells connected by nanotubes can be electrically coupled
through interposed gap-junction channels. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA, 2010. 107(40):
p. 17194-9.
127. Teddy, J.M. and P.M. Kulesa, In vivo evidence for short- and long-range cell
communication in cranial neural crest cells. Development, 2004. 131(24): p. 6141-
51.
128. Wang, X. and H.H. Gerdes, Long-distance electrical coupling via tunneling
nanotubes. Biochim Biophys Acta, 2012. 1818(8): p. 2082-6.
129. McMillen, P., et al., Beyond Neurons: Long Distance Communication in
Development and Cancer. Front Cell Dev Biol, 2021. 9: p. 739024.
130. Osswald, M., et al., Brain tumour cells interconnect to a functional and resistant
network. Nature, 2015. 528(7580): p. 93-8.
131. Osswald, M., et al., A malignant cellular network in gliomas: potential clinical
implications. Neuro Oncol, 2016. 18(4): p. 479-85.
132. Weil, S., et al., Tumor microtubes convey resistance to surgical lesions and
chemotherapy in gliomas. Neuro Oncol, 2017. 19(10): p. 1316-1326.
133. Keijzer, F. and A. Arnellos, The animal sensorimotor organization: a challenge for the
environmental complexity thesis. Biol Philos, 2017. 32(3): p. 421-441.
134. Pai, V.P. and M. Levin, HCN2 channel-induced rescue of brain, eye, heart and gut
teratogenesis caused by nicotine, ethanol and aberrant notch signalling. Wound
Repair Regen, 2022.
135. Pai, V.P., et al., HCN2 Channel-Induced Rescue of Brain Teratogenesis via Local and
Long-Range Bioelectric Repair. Frontiers in Cellular Neuroscience, 2020. 14(136): p.
136.
136. Ebrahimkhani, M.R. and M. Levin, Synthetic living machines: A new window on life.
iScience, 2021. 24(5): p. 102505.
137. Levin, M., The Multiscale Wisdom of the Body: Collective Intelligence as a Tractable
Interface for Next-Generation Biomedicine. Bioessays, 2024: p. e202400196.
138. Whited, J.L. and M. Levin, Bioelectrical controls of morphogenesis: from ancient
mechanisms of cell coordination to biomedical opportunities. Curr Opin Genet Dev,
2019. 57: p. 61-69.
139. Ding, F., et al., Changes in the composition of brain interstitial ions control the
sleep-wake cycle. Science, 2016. 352(6285): p. 550-5.
140. Purvis, J.E. and G. Lahav, Encoding and decoding cellular information through
signaling dynamics. Cell, 2013. 152(5): p. 945-56.
141. Johnson, H.E. and J.E. Toettcher, Signaling Dynamics Control Cell Fate in the Early
Drosophila Embryo. Dev Cell, 2019. 48(3): p. 361-370 e3.
142. Wilson, M.Z., et al., Tracing Information Flow from Erk to Target Gene Induction
Reveals Mechanisms of Dynamic and Combinatorial Control. Mol Cell, 2017. 67(5):
p. 757-769 e5.
143. Goglia, A.G., et al., A Live-Cell Screen for Altered Erk Dynamics Reveals Principles of
Proliferative Control. Cell Syst, 2020. 10(3): p. 240-253 e6.
144. Rühl, P., et al., An Ultrasensitive Genetically Encoded Voltage Indicator Uncovers
the Electrical Activity of Non-Excitable Cells. Advanced Science, 2024. 11(20): p.
2307938.
145. Pai, V.P., et al., HCN2 Channel-Induced Rescue of Brain Teratogenesis via Local and
Long-Range Bioelectric Repair. Frontiers in Cellular Neuroscience, 2020. 14(136).
146. Pitcairn, E., et al., Coordinating heart morphogenesis: A novel role for
hyperpolarization-activated cyclic nucleotide-gated (HCN) channels during
cardiogenesis in Xenopus laevis. Commun Integr Biol, 2017. 10(3): p. e1309488.
147. Johard, H., et al., HCN Channel Activity Balances Quiescence and Proliferation in
Neural Stem Cells and Is a Selective Target for Neuroprotection During Cancer
Treatment. Mol Cancer Res, 2020. 18(10): p. 1522-1533.
148. Lau, Y.T., et al., Effects of hyperpolarization-activated cyclic nucleotide-gated (HCN)
channel blockers on the proliferation and cell cycle progression of embryonic stem
cells. Pflugers Archiv: European journal of physiology, 2011. 461(1): p. 191-202.
149. Bruzauskaite, I., et al., Relevance of HCN2-expressing human mesenchymal stem
cells for the generation of biological pacemakers. Stem Cell Res Ther, 2016. 7(1): p.
67.
150. Benarroch, E.E., HCN channels: function and clinical implications. Neurology, 2013.
80(3): p. 304-10.
151. Depuydt, A.S., S. Peigneur, and J. Tytgat, Review: HCN Channels in the Heart. Curr
Cardiol Rev, 2022. 18(4): p. e040222200836.
152. Stevens, S.M. and W.T. Pu, HCN4 charges up the first heart field. Circulation
research, 2013. 113(4): p. 350-1.
153. Barbieri, M., The definitions of information and meaning two possible boundaries
between physics and biology. Riv Biol, 2004. 97(1): p. 91-109.
154. Salthe, S.N., Hierarchy. More Developed Sign: Interpreting the Work of Jesper
Hoffmeyer, 2012. 10: p. 155-156.
155. Salthe, S.N., The System of Interpretance, Naturalizing Meaning as Finality.
Biosemiotics, 2008. 1(3): p. 285-294.
156. Ó. Nualláin, S., Subjects and Objects: Metaphysics, Biology, Consciousness, and
Cognition. Biosemiotics, 2008. 1(2): p. 239-251.
157. Kauffman, S. and P. Clayton, On emergence, agency, and organization. Biology &
Philosophy, 2006. 21(4): p. 501-521.
158. Salthe, S.N., Semiosis as development. Joint Conference on the Science and
Technology of Intelligent Systems, 1998: p. 730-735.

This page appears to be blank.  As per the instructions, no additional commentary or explanation should be added.