Triple-Negative Breast Cancer Cells Activate Sensory Neurons via TRPV1 to Drive Nerve Outgrowth and Tumor Progression

Authors: Hanan Bloomer¹,², Savannah R. Parker², Audrey L. Pierce², Wesley Clawson³, Mallory M. Caron¹,², Thomas Gerton², Ankit Pandey², Thanh T. Le⁴, Tolulope Adewumi², Charlotte Kuperwasser ¹,⁵, Michael Levin ³,⁶,⁷, Madeleine J. Oudin ¹,²,*

¹Department of Developmental, Molecular & Chemical Biology, Tufts University School of Medicine, Boston, MA 02111, USA; ²Department of Biomedical Engineering, Tufts University, Medford, MA 02155, USA; ³Department of Biology, Tufts University, Medford, MA 02155, USA; ⁴Vinmec-VinUni Institute of Immunology, College of Health Science, VinUniversity, Hanoi, Vietnam; ⁵Laboratory for the Convergence of Biomedical, Physical, and Engineering Sciences, Tufts University School of Medicine, Boston, MA 02111, USA; ⁶Allen Discovery Center, Tufts University, Medford, MA 02155, USA; ⁷Wyss Institute for Biologically Inspired Engineering, Harvard University, Boston, MA 02115, USA

*Corresponding author: Correspondence should be addressed to M.J.O. at Madeleine.Oudin@tufts.edu

Abstract:
The tumor microenvironment in triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) is characterized by increased sensory nerve density, which contributes to cancer progression by promoting migration and metastasis. However, the origin of tumor-innervating nerves and the mechanisms driving sensory innervation into tumors remain poorly understood. Using in vivo retrograde labeling techniques, we show that mammary tumors are associated with an increase in nerves originating from the dorsal root ganglia. Additionally, we find that TNBC cells trigger stress and activation markers and induce neuronal firing in a transient receptor potential vanilloid subtype 1 (TRPV1)-dependent manner. In both 2D and 3D cell culture models, TNBC cells promote outgrowth of sensory nerves that is abrogated with Trpv1 knockout. We identified c-Jun and IL-6 as an effector of neurite outgrowth that acts downstream of TRPV1 to promote outgrowth in vitro. Finally, in Trpv1 knockout mice, TNBC tumors exhibit delayed growth and reduced lung metastasis. These findings suggest a critical role for TRPV1 in tumor-nerve crosstalk, offering a potential target to reduce metastatic disease.

[PAGE 2] Introduction:
The tumor microenvironment (TME) plays a critical role in driving cancer progression by influencing cell growth and metastasis. The complex and continuously evolving TME is composed of the extracellular matrix (ECM), a heterogenous collection of resident and infiltrating cells, and blood and lymphatic vessels¹. Nerves were first documented to infiltrate the TME more than 100 years ago². Since then, increased peripheral nerve density has been identified in a host of solid tumors, including breast, prostate, colorectal, lung, pancreatic, ovarian, and head and neck carcinomas³⁻⁹. The peripheral nervous system is comprised of sympathetic, parasympathetic, sensory, and motor nerves. Presence of all but the latter have been identified in tumors, with some tumors having a single innervation source, while others are composed of several nerve types¹⁰,¹¹. More recently, nerves have been shown to regulate tumor progression, including both promoting and suppressing tumor growth and metastasis. Understanding the mechanisms driving increased tumor innervation could provide a novel strategy to reduce metastatic disease and improve patient survival.

Breast cancer is the most common form of malignancy in women, accounting for almost one in three new female cancer diagnoses each year¹². Metastatic disease, where tumor cells disseminate to secondary sites in the body, remains the primary cause of breast cancer-related deaths, resulting in 44,000 deaths annually in the United States¹³. Triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) is a highly invasive molecular subtype characterized by the lack of targetable cell surface receptors and high rates of distant organ metastasis¹⁴. Human breast tumors have an increase in sensory nerve fiber density compared to healthy breast tissue, and TNBC exhibits increased innervation compared to other subtypes⁵,¹⁵,¹⁶. Across all subtypes, innervation is associated with higher rates of distant organ metastasis and decreased disease-free survival⁵,¹⁷,¹⁸. Co-injection of TNBC cells and sensory neurons into the mammary fat pads of mice, which leads to increased sensory nerve density in the primary tumor, significantly increases tumor growth and metastasis, while chemical denervation of sensory nerves reduces tumor progression¹⁵,¹⁶.

Sensory nerves retain the ability to grow and regenerate into adulthood, suggesting that increased sensory nerve innervation in TNBC is driven by the outgrowth of existing nerves from the healthy adjacent tissue into the tumor. This growth is regulated by extrinsic cues, including neurotrophic factors (e.g., NGF, BDNF), axon guidance molecules (e.g., semaphorins, netrins), ECM components, and bioelectric signals such as spontaneous or evoked neural activity¹⁹,²⁰. These cues act through receptors like Trk receptors and ion channels, triggering intracellular pathways that activate transcriptional programs driving cytoskeletal remodeling, membrane trafficking, and neurite extension. While these pathways have been well characterized in development and injury, their role in tumor-induced nerve growth is only beginning to be explored. Deletion of the axon guidance molecule SLIT2 in endothelial cells significantly reduced sensory nerve density in a 4T1 xenograft mouse model of TNBC¹⁶. In rats, pharmacologic inhibition of VEGF or nerve growth factor (NGF) receptors in a N-Methyl-N-nitrosourea (MNU)-induced model of breast cancer decreased tumoral sensory nerve innervation²¹. However, the direct effects of tumor cells themselves on sensory nerves and the downstream neuronal mechanisms mediating tumor innervation remain poorly understood.

Transient receptor potential vanilloid subtype 1 (TRPV1) is a non-selective cation channel predominantly expressed on peripheral sensory neurons that plays a key role in detecting noxious stimuli²². Its activation leads to the influx of calcium and sodium ions, resulting in membrane depolarization and the transmission of pain signals to the central nervous system. In addition to its role in nociception, TRPV1 contributes to neurite outgrowth and regeneration through calcium-dependent signaling pathways²³⁻²⁵. Many known activators and sensitizers of TRPV1, such as heat (>43°C), mild acidification, inflammatory mediators, and NGF, are secreted by TNBC cells or present in the TME⁵,²⁶,²⁷. High TRPV1 expression in TNBC is associated with decreased patient survival¹⁵. Based on these observations, we hypothesized that tumor cell-derived secreted factors activate TRPV1 on sensory nerves in adjacent healthy tissue, triggering regenerative signaling that promotes neurite outgrowth into the TME.

Here, we show that mammary tumors display increased innervation by nerves originating from the dorsal root ganglia along the spinal cord. Using methods novel to the cancer neuroscience field, including microelectrode arrays and 3D hydrogel models, we demonstrate that TNBC cells stimulate sensory nerve activation and neurite outgrowth through TRPV1 signaling. Additionally, we find that cJun-mediated IL-6 expression acts downstream of TRPV1 to promote neurite outgrowth. Finally, genetic knockout of Trpv1 in vivo delays tumor growth and

[PAGE 3] Results:
Tumor innervating nerves originate in the dorsal root ganglia
Increased sensory nerve density in TNBC is likely driven by the outgrowth of existing nerves into the tumor¹⁰. As healthy breast tissue is primarily innervated by sensory neurons originating from the dorsal root ganglia (DRG), we hypothesized that tumor-innervating nerves originate from pre-existing DRG neurons that extend into the TME²⁸. Previous studies have demonstrated the presence of DRG nerves in both mouse and rat models of breast cancer using retrograde labeling techniques¹⁶,²¹. However, these studies lacked non-tumor controls, making it difficult to assess how sensory innervation from DRG neurons evolves during tumor progression relative to normal mammary tissue. To address this, we injected the retrograde tracer Dil into the fourth mammary fat pad or spontaneous tumor of FVB control and MMTV-PyMT mice at 6, 9, and 12 weeks of age, and harvested DRG from each spinal level (Fig. 1a). We observed similarly low levels of Dil-labeled DRG neurons in both FVB and MMTV-PyMT mice at 6 weeks of age, suggestive of baseline mammary tissue innervation (Fig. 1b). At 9 and 12 weeks of age, during early and late stages of tumor development, MMTV-PyMT mice exhibited a significant increase in Dil-labeled neurons compared to FVB controls. There was no significant difference in innervation between 9- and 12-week MMTV-PyMT mice, indicating that sensory nerve recruitment occurs early during tumor progression²⁹. We identified T8 to L2 DRGs as the predominant source of sensory innervation into abdominal mammary tumors, which corresponds anatomically to the spinal levels that typically supply sensory input to the lower mammary glands (Fig. 1c)³⁰.

Triple-negative breast cancer cells induce sensory neuron activation and stress response pathways
Neurite outgrowth is often preceded and accompanied by the activation of cellular stress or signaling pathways within neurons. To determine whether tumor cells trigger these neuronal responses, we assessed sensory neuron activation in both in vivo and in vitro models. DRG were harvested from mammary tumor-bearing MMTV-PyMT or control FVB mice for immunofluorescence staining or RNA isolation. In addition, DRG neurons from C57BL/6J mice were dissociated and cultured alone or co-cultured with non-tumorigenic MCF10A breast epithelial cells, MDA-MB-231 (231) human TNBC cells, or PyMT-2900 and PY8119 murine TNBC cells.

We performed immunofluorescence staining for nuclear ATF3 and cFos, two transcription factors upregulated in response to cellular stress and neuronal activity. ATF3 is a marker of nerve injury and is associated with regenerative programs, including neurite outgrowth, while cFos is an immediate early gene (IEG) rapidly induced following neuronal activation and calcium influx³¹⁻³⁵. DRG from tumor-bearing MMTV-PyMT mice exhibited a significant increase in nuclear ATF3 staining compared to FVB controls (Fig. 1d). In vitro, DRG neurons co-cultured with human or murine TNBC cells, but not MCF10A cells, showed significantly elevated nuclear ATF3 expression compared to DRG cultured alone (Fig. 1e, S1a, S2a). Consistent with an activation response, nuclear cFos expression was increased in DRG from MMTV-PyMT mice relative to FVB controls, and co-culture with TNBC cell lines, but not MCF10A cells, led to a significant increase in neuronal cFos expression (Fig. 1f, 1g, S1b, S2b).

Previous studies have shown that calcitonin gene-related peptide (CGRP)-expressing nociceptive neurons innervate human and murine TNBC tumors¹⁶. CGRP, a neuropeptide involved in pain signaling and neurogenic inflammation, is known to increase following neuronal activation or injury³⁶⁻³⁹. We observed a significant increase in the expression of Calca, the gene encoding CGRP, in DRG from MMTV-PyMT mice relative to FVB controls (Fig. 1H). In vitro, CGRP expression was significantly increased in DRG neurons co-cultured with 231 cells, but not with murine TNBC cell lines (Fig. 11, S1C, S2C). In summary, TNBC tumors broadly stimulate stress- and activation-associated pathways in sensory neurons in vitro and in vivo.

[PAGE 3] Triple-negative breast cancer cells drive neurite outgrowth in a TRPV1-dependent manner
We next sought to determine whether TNBC cells drive sensory neuron growth in vitro and if these effects are dependent on neuronal TRPV1. We measured the effect of tumor cells or their conditioned media (CM) on morphological features linked to neurite initiation, growth, and maturation. WT DRG cultured with non-tumorigenic MCF10A cell CM or MCF10A cells induced no significant changes in neuron morphology (Fig. 3c-f, S5a-e). In contrast, 231 cell CM or 231 cell co-culture significantly enhanced several hallmarks of neuronal growth (Fig. 3, S5a-e). WT DRG exhibited a significant increase in the number of primary neurites extending from neuron somas when cultured with 231 cell CM or 231 cells, indicative of enhanced neuritogenesis (Fig. 3c, S5b)⁴³. Additionally, 231 cell CM and 231 cell co-culture significantly increased both the maximum diameter of neurites and the area of neuron cell bodies, features associated with neuronal growth and regeneration (Fig. 3d-e, S5c-d)⁴⁴⁻⁴⁶. Direct co-culture with 231 cells, but not 231 cell CM, significantly increased neurite bundling, a process known as fasciculation that facilitates coordinated axon growth during regeneration and development (Fig. 3a, 3f, S5e)⁴⁷. In DRG from Trpv1⁻/⁻ mice, however, 231 cell CM and 231 cell co-culture failed to induce significant changes in primary neurite number and neurite diameter (Fig. 3b-d, S5a-c). A modest increase in neuron cell body area and neurite fasciculation was observed in Trpv1⁻/⁻ neurons co-cultured with 231 cell CM or cells, but these effects were attenuated compared to WT neurons (Fig. 3e, S5d-e).


[PAGE 4] TNBC cells promote directional neurite outgrowth from DRG explants in a TRPV1-dependent manner.
While 2D assays provide valuable insights into cancer-nerve interactions, they lack the ECM components that accurately mimic the physiological environment. Complex mammary tissues can grow in 3D hydrogel scaffolds composed of laminin, hyaluronan, fibronectin, and collagen⁴⁸,⁴⁹. We confirmed that these 3D hydrogels support the growth of DRG explants, which extend long neurites over a 16-day period (Fig. S6). Next, to investigate whether TNBC cell secretions drive directional outgrowth of neurites, DRG from WT or Trpv1⁻/⁻ mice were positioned in the center of a hydrogel, with 231 cells placed on one side and no cells placed on the other side (Fig. 4a). DRG from WT mice exhibited a significant increase in neurite density towards 231 cells that was abrogated with Trpv1⁻/⁻ DRG (Fig. 4b-c). Together, these results demonstrate that tumor cells induce significant morphological changes in sensory neurons associated with increased neuronal process outgrowth and innervation.

[PAGE 5] Sensory neuron activation by tumor cells is partially mediated by TRPV1
TRPV1 is a non-selective cation channel that, upon stimulation, triggers sensory neuron activation through calcium influx and promotes neurite outgrowth²³⁻²⁵. Although TRPV1-expressing nociceptive neurons are found in human TNBC tumors and high TRPV1 expression is associated with decreased patient survival, its role in tumor-nerve crosstalk has not been directly studied¹⁵. TRPV1 activation drives cFos signaling and increases CGRP expression³⁷,³⁹⁻⁴¹. Given the observed effects of TNBC cells on these activation markers (Fig. 1), we hypothesized that tumor cells stimulate TRPV1 signaling, leading to neuronal activation and potentially promoting neurite outgrowth.

First, we measured TRPV1 expression in DRG neurons cultured alone or co-cultured with MCF10A or TNBC cells. While MCF10A cells induced a significant increase in TRPV1 expression, co-culture with 231 cells led to a more robust response (Fig. 2a, S1d). DRG co-cultured with PY8119 cells also exhibited a significant increase in TRPV1 expression, while PyMT-2900 co-culture did not elicit a significant change (Fig. 2a, S1d, S2d). Since TRPV1 expression levels do not necessarily reflect its activation status, we next sought to functionally test the involvement of TRPV1 signaling in sensory neuron activation⁴². In contrast to DRG from C57BL/6J mice, DRG isolated from Trpv1⁻/⁻ mice co-cultured with 231 cells did not exhibit a significant increase in cFos or CGRP expression (Fig. 2b, 2c, S3).

Since TRPV1 activation leads to calcium influx and can initiate action potentials in sensory neurons, we used microelectrode arrays (MEAs) to assess whether TNBC cells stimulate neuronal activity via TRPV1. DRG from female WT or Trpv1⁻/⁻ mice were cultured alone or co-cultured with MCF10A or TNBC cells for 21 days on MEAs after which spontaneous neuronal activity was recorded over a 5-minute period. Co-culture with 231 and PY8119 cells, but not MCF10A cells, significantly elevated the mean firing rate in WT DRG, while MCF10A cell co-culture decreased firing (Fig. 2d, 2e, S4a). In contrast, Trpv1⁻/⁻ DRG co-cultured with 231 cells showed a significant decrease in mean firing rate. Next, we assessed the interspike interval, where a shorter interval reflects increased frequency of neuronal firing. WT DRG co-cultured with 231 and PY8119 cells significantly decreased the interspike interval, whereas MCF10A co-culture led to an increase (Fig. 2e, 2f, S4a). Trpv1⁻/⁻ DRG co-cultured with 231 cells exhibited an increase in time between spikes. WT DRG cultured with conditioned media (CM) from 231 cells led to varied effects, with no significant increase in mean firing rate but a significant decrease in interspike interval (Fig. S4a, S4c-d). Together, these data show evidence that TNBC cells drive increased electrical activity in DRG neurons in a TRPV1-dependent manner, raising the possibility that TRPV1 also promotes neurite outgrowth.

[PAGE 5] IL-6 acts downstream of TRPV1 to promote neurite outgrowth in response to triple-negative breast cancer cells
To elucidate the mechanism by which TRPV1 activation promotes neurite outgrowth, we analyzed RNA sequencing data from DRG cultured alone or co-cultured with 231 cells. The sequencing was performed and made publicly available when we investigated the effect of DRG on TNBC cells, but was not analyzed¹⁵.

Gene ontology pathways analysis revealed that co-culture with 231 cells led to an upregulation of genes involved in cell proliferation, cell migration, and developmental processes in DRG, suggesting activation of pathways associated with neurite outgrowth (Fig. 5a). TRPV1 stimulation induces calcium influx, which leads to the activation of various transcription factors and downstream effects⁴⁰,⁵⁰. To identify candidate pathways involved in neurite outgrowth, we performed transcription factor enrichment analysis on genes upregulated in DRG co-cultured with 231 cells. We found that cJun was among the most highly enriched transcription factors (Fig. 5b). cJun is activated downstream of TRPV1 stimulation and promotes neurite outgrowth by regulating a broad set of genes, making it a strong candidate for further analysis⁴⁰,⁵¹⁻⁵⁴. Specifically, Interleukin 6 (Il6), a known cJun target gene and key mediator of neurite outgrowth, was highly upregulated, showing a 5.27-fold increase in co-culture compared to DRG alone (Fig. 5c)⁵⁵⁻⁵⁹. Based on these data, we hypothesized that TNBC cells activate TRPV1 on sensory neurons, triggering cJun activation and subsequent IL-6 expression, which promotes neurite outgrowth (Fig. 5d).

We validated the increased cJun activity observed in our RNAseq data using immunofluorescence in vivo and in vitro. Nuclear cJun expression was significantly elevated in DRG sections from tumor-bearing MMTV-PyMT mice compared to FVB controls (Fig. 5e). Moreover, co-culture of DRG neurons with TNBC cells, but not MCF10A cells, led to a significant increase in nuclear cJun expression (Fig. 5f, S7a-b). Co-culture of 231 cells with DRG neurons from Trpv1⁻/⁻ mice did not result in a significant increase in cJun expression, suggesting that TRPV1 signaling is required for tumor cell-driven upregulation of cJun (Fig. 5g, S7c).

To investigate the role of IL-6 in promoting neurite outgrowth, DRG neurons from Il6⁻/⁻ mice were cultured alone, with 231 cell CM, or with 231 cells, and morphological changes were assessed. Similar to the findings with Trpv1⁻/⁻ DRG (Fig. 3), co-culture with 231 cell CM or 231 cells did not significantly alter neuritogenesis or neurite maximum diameter, while a slight increase in neuron cell body area was observed (Fig. 5h-j, S8a-d). In addition, 231 CM or 231 cells failed to induce an increase in neurite bundling in Il6⁻/⁻ DRG neurons (Fig. 5k, S8e). Together, these findings suggest that TRPV1 activation promotes neurite outgrowth in part through cJun-mediated upregulation of IL-6 signaling.


[PAGE 13] Knockout of Trpv1 slows tumor progression
To investigate the role of TRPV1 in vivo, murine PY8119 TNBC cells were injected into the fourth right mammary fat pads of 7-week-old C57BL/6J (WT) or Trpv1⁻/⁻ mice. Loss of TRPV1 delayed tumor growth, with Trpv1⁻/⁻ mice exhibiting significantly smaller tumor volumes at days 10 and 16 compared to WT mice (Fig. 6a-b). Tumor weight at the day 25 endpoint was significantly decreased in Trpv1⁻/⁻ mice (Fig. 6c). Analysis of lung tissue with hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) staining found statistically significant decreases in both the number of lung metastasis and the percentage of mice with metastasis (Fig. 6d-f).

[PAGE 13] Discussion:
Despite growing evidence linking nerves to tumor progression, the mechanisms that drive tumor innervation remain poorly understood. Given that TNBC is predominantly innervated by sensory nerves, we asked whether tumor-derived cues might activate sensory neurons and thereby promote neurite outgrowth into the tumor microenvironment. We find that TNBC cells activate sensory neurons via TRPV1, leading to increased expression of activity markers, elevated bioelectric activity, and enhanced neurite outgrowth in both 2D and 3D models. These effects are mediated through TRPV1-dependent c-Jun signaling and downstream IL-6. Lastly, we show that knockout of TRPV1 in sensory nerves decreases tumor growth and metastasis to the lung. This is the first comprehensive description using both 2D and 3D models of tumor cell-driven effects on sensory nerve activation, electrical activity, and growth. Our results identify novel strategies that could suppress innervation and thereby reduce the pro-tumorigenic effects of nerves.

First, we find that TNBC cells activate sensory neurons via TRPV1, resulting in increased expression of activity markers and enhanced bioelectric activity, features known to be associated with nerve regeneration in the context of injury. Tumor-bearing MMTV-PyMT mice demonstrated an increase in cFos and CGRP in their DRG compared to FVB controls. These effects were validated in in vitro cultures and were abrogated in Trpv1 knockout neurons. Using MEAs, we showed that co-culture with TNBC cells increases the firing rate and decreases the interspike interval of DRG neurons. To our knowledge, this is the first evidence of breast tumor cells driving bioelectric activity in sensory neurons. Increased sensory nerve activation and firing has been well described in the context of nerve injury and regeneration, where DRGs upregulate transcriptional programs that drive growth and fire in a bursting pattern⁶⁰. These data are perhaps not surprising given that the tumor microenvironment has long been described as a "wound that never heals," creating an environment akin to nerve injury which can drive regeneration. Tumor growth is also associated with increased blood vessel density, which often co-occurs with sensory nerve growth⁶¹. Further, while synaptic structures have not been described between sensory neurons and breast cancer cells in the primary tumor, recent studies have identified functional neuron-to-tumor synapses in brain metastases and gliomas, where neuronal activity promotes tumor growth through glutamatergic signaling⁶²⁻⁶⁴. Small cell lung cancer cells co-cultured with neurons exhibit synaptic gene expression and electrophysiological responses⁶⁵. These findings raise the possibility that certain cancers, including peripheral tumors, may engage neurons through more structured, contact-dependent mechanisms in addition to paracrine signaling. Future studies are needed to dissect whether TNBC-driven effects on sensory nerve activation and electrical activity are mediated by actual synapses or combinations of local pro-regenerative cues that activate sensory neurons and promote outgrowth.

Our data demonstrate that some effects of tumor cells on nerves are driven by direct tumor cell-nerve contact, but some are not. Indeed, in 2D cell culture assays, both conditioned media from TNBC cells and direct co-culture enhanced several morphological features associated with neurite outgrowth, including increased neuritogenesis, greater neurite diameter, and enlarged soma size. Interestingly, direct co-culture, but not conditioned media, increased neurite fasciculation. This bundling was also observed in Trpv1 knockout DRG co-cultured with 231 cells, suggesting that tumor cell-driven fasciculation is a contact-dependent, TRPV1-independent process. It may instead be mediated by direct tumor cell-neuron contact via adhesion molecules such as integrins or cadherins, which could in turn upregulate adhesion molecule and receptor expression in neurons⁶⁶. Alternatively, tumor-induced stiffening of the extracellular matrix or spatial constraints imposed by tumor cells may restrict neurite pathfinding and promote bundling⁴⁷. In 3D hydrogels, where TNBC cells and DRG explants are physically separated, directional neurite outgrowth towards tumor cells was observed in wild-type neurons alone, supporting a model in which secreted factors drive TRPV1-dependent neurite extension. Additionally, this 3D system offers a more physiologically relevant platform to study tumor–neuron interactions, preserving the architecture of the ganglia and supporting endogenous cell-cell signaling that may be lost in dissociated cultures. Importantly, neuronal cell bodies remain spatially distinct from the tumor cells, consistent with the in vivo organization in which peripheral ganglia innervate tumors without migrating into them. Interestingly, conditioned media had varied effects on the bioelectric activity of DRG neurons, with no change in mean firing rate but a decrease in interspike interval. This suggests that CM may lead to alterations in DRG firing patterns that differ from direct co-culture. The tumor microenvironment provides many chemical and biophysical cues that are known to activate TRPV1 on sensory neurons, such as heat (>43°C), mild acidification, inflammatory mediators, and NGF⁵,²⁶,²⁷. One possibility is that direct tumor-neuron contact allows for additional modes of interaction beyond TRPV1 activation, such as mechanically gated channels, ephaptic coupling, or even synapse-like formation⁶⁷,⁶⁸. Further, it is possible that sustained tumor-cell nerve interactions over time are needed to produce the soluble cues needed for these effects to be seen. Most studies to date have focused on tumor-secreted neurotrophic factors, such as NGF and BDNF, or axon guidance molecules, such as SLIT2, semaphorins, or ephrin-B13, 8, 9, 16, 21, 69-75. While these signals are critical for neurogenesis during development and regeneration, other regulatory mechanisms, including physical properties of the ECM, cell-cell adhesions, inflammatory cytokines and injury signaling, and notably, neuronal activation, also contribute to neurite outgrowth⁷⁶⁻⁷⁹. While it is likely that a combination of TME cues contribute to the sensory neuron activation we describe here, future studies are needed to dissect the contribution of individual signals to sensory innervation.

Lastly, we observed a critical role of TRPV1 in tumor cell-driven neuron activation and neurite outgrowth, and observed reduced tumor growth and metastasis in Trpv1 knockout mice. These results suggest that inhibiting TRPV1 could be a viable strategy to disrupt tumor–nerve interactions. TRPV1 antagonists were originally developed for the treatment of chronic pain and inflammatory conditions due to the channel’s established role in nociception⁸⁰,⁸¹. Several potent TRPV1 inhibitors, including AMG 517, SB-705498, and JNJ-17203212, showed promising analgesic activity in preclinical models and entered early-phase clinical trials⁸²,⁸³. However, development was largely halted due to adverse effects, including hyperthermia and impaired noxious heat sensation, which raised safety concerns about systemic TRPV1 blockade⁸⁴,⁸⁵. More recently, new approaches have been developed to overcome the limitations of earlier TRPV1 inhibitors, including modality-selective antagonists that block specific modes of TRPV1 activation while sparing thermosensation, peripherally restricted compounds that minimize central side effects, and localized delivery strategies that reduce systemic exposure. Continued development of safer and more targeted TRPV1 inhibitors, alongside efforts to identify the specific tumor-derived cues that activate TRPV1, may pave the way for novel therapeutic strategies that disrupt nerve-cancer interactions in TNBC and beyond.

[PAGE 15] Methods:
[PAGE 15] Animal care
All animal procedures were reviewed and approved by the Tufts University Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee. All mice were housed 3-5 mice per cage in an on-site housing facility with access to standard food, water, and 12/12 light cycle.

[PAGE 15] Dorsal root ganglia dissection
Dorsal root ganglia (DRG) dissections were performed as previously described¹⁵,⁸⁶. Briefly, mice were euthanized by CO2 and spinal columns were isolated. Lateral cuts were made along the spinal column to expose the spinal cord. Ganglia that lie adjacent to the spinal cord were collected using sterile tweezers. DRG were either fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde and embedded in paraffin for immunofluorescence imaging, collected for RNA extraction, dissociated into single cell suspension for 2D plating, or cultured as explants in 3D hydrogels, as explained below.

[PAGE 15] Retrograde tracing
Lipophilic tracer 1,1'-Dioctadecyl-3,3,3',3'-Tetramethylindocarbocyanine Perchlorate (Dil, Cat. No. D3911, Invitrogen) was prepared using 100% ethanol for a concentration of 2.5 mg/ml. At 6, 9, and 12 weeks of age, 25 µl Dil was injected into the 4th right mammary fat pad or corresponding tumor of three female FVB (Strain #001800, Jackson Laboratory) or PyMT-MMTV (Strain #002374, Jackson Laboratory) mice. One of the week 12 MMTV-PyMT mice was euthanized prior to the planned endpoint in accordance with IACUC protocols due to tumor volume exceeding 2 cm³, and no data was collected from this animal. Three days after injection at each timepoint, mice were euthanized by CO2 and dorsal root ganglia were dissected individually from each spinal level, with each DRG placed in a separate tube for independent processing. Single cell dissociation of each DRG was performed with 1.25 mg/ml Collagenase A (Cat. No. 10103586001, Sigma) in HBSS for 1 hour at 37°C, followed by 1.2 mg/ml Trypsin (Cat. No. 25200114, Gibco) in HBSS for 15 min at 37°C. DRG were then mixed by gentle pipetting. Next, DRG were centrifuged at 1500 rpm for 3 min and resuspended in complete neurobasal media, which consists of: Neurobasal Medium (Cat. No. 21103-049, Gibco), 2% B27 Plus Supplement (Cat. No. A35828-01, Gibco), 1% GlutaMAX Supplement (Cat. No. 35050-061, Gibco), 1% Antibiotic-Antimycotic (Cat. No. 15240-062, Gibco), 25 ng/ml Recombinant Human ẞ-NGF (Cat. No. 450-01, PeproTech), and 10 ng/ml Human GDNF Recombinant Protein (Cat. No. PHC7045, Gibco). 24-well glass bottom plates (Cat. No. P24-1.5H-N, Cellvis) were coated with 0.1 mg/ml Poly-D-Lysine (Cat. No. A38904-01) for 1 hour at 37°C and 20 µg/ml Laminin (Cat. No. L2020, Sigma) for 1 hour at 37°C. Cells from each dissociated DRG were seeded into its own well of a 24-well plate, maintaining one spinal level per well. In some cases, specific DRG could not be located during dissection and were therefore not included in subsequent analyses. 24-40 hours after plating, fluorescence and brightfield images were taken using the Zeiss Axio Observer (Zeiss) with six fields of view per well to visualize Dil-labeled neurons. Images were graded independently by two observers on a 0-4 scale based on the number and intensity of Dil-positive neurons. Scores from all fields and both reviewers were averaged to yield a single innervation score per DRG.


[PAGE 16] Dorsal root ganglia immunofluorescence staining and qPCR
Three 13-week-old female FVB (Strain #001800, Jackson Laboratory) or PyMT-MMTV (Strain #002374, Jackson Laboratory) mice were euthanized and DRG were dissected from T10-L2 spinal levels. For immunofluorescence, DRG were fixed for 24 hours in 4% Paraformaldehyde (Cat. No. 15710-S, Electron Microscopy Sciences) in PBS, embedded in paraffin, and sectioned into 10 µm sections. Sections were deparaffinized and antigen retrieval was performed in Citra Plus Solution (Cat. No. HK080, Biogenex). Sections were then blocked in PBS with 0.5% Tween-20 (Cat. No. P1379, Sigma), 10% Normal Donkey Serum (Cat. No. 017-000-121, Jackson ImmunoResearch), and 20 µg/mL AffiniPure Fab Fragment Donkey Anti-Mouse IgG (Cat. No. 715-007-003, Jackson ImmunoResearch), and incubated with primary antibodies (Table 1) overnight at 4°C. The following day, sections were incubated with 4',6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI, dilution: 1/1000, Cat. No. D1306, Invitrogen) and fluorophore-conjugated donkey secondary antibodies (dilution: 1/500, Jackson ImmunoResearch), including Alexa Flour 488 and Alexa Flour 647, for 2 hours at room temperature. Imaging was performed using a Keyence BZ-X710 microscope at 20X magnification. Nuclear fluorescence intensity (ATF3, cFos, cJun) in DRG neurons was quantified using a custom ImageJ macro, with β3-tubulin identifying neurons and DAPI defining nuclear masks. Nuclear intensity values were normalized to β3-tubulin intensity to account for variances in staining efficiency.

For quantitative PCR (qPCR), DRG from spinal levels T8-L4 were pooled from each mouse, and total RNA was extracted using a Quick-RNA Miniprep Kit (Cat. No. R1055, Zymo Research) according to the manufacturer's instructions. Complementary DNA (cDNA) was synthesized using the High-Capacity cDNA Reverse Transcription Kit (Cat. No. 4368814, ThermoFisher Scientific) at the following thermocycler conditions: Step 1, 25°C for 10 min; Step 2, 37°C for 120 min; Step 3, 85°C for 5 min; Step 4, 4°C hold. qPCR was then performed using TaqMan Fast Advanced Master Mix (Cat. No. 4444557, ThermoFisher Scientific) and TaqMan Gene Expression Assays (Cat. No. 4453320, ThermoFisher Scientific) for mouse Calca (Assay ID: mm00801463_g1), with mouse Gapdh as the endogenous control (Assay ID: mm99999915_g1). Relative gene expression was calculated using the ΔΔCT method.

[PAGE 16] Cell culture
MCF10A, MDA-MB-231