Automated Analysis of Behavior:
A Computer-Controlled System for Drug
Screening and the Investigation of Learning
Caitlin Hicks,¹ Debra Sorocco,¹ Michael Levin1,2
1 Forsyth Center for Regenerative and Developmental Biology, The Forsyth Institute,
Boston, Massachusetts 02115
2 Developmental Biology Department, Harvard School of Dental Medicine,
Boston, Massachusetts 02115
Received 9 February 2006; accepted 13 March 2006

ABSTRACT: Efforts to understand cognition will be
greatly facilitated by computerized systems that enable
the automated analysis of animal behavior. A number of
controversies in the invertebrate learning field have
resulted from difficulties inherent in manual experiments.
Driven by the necessity to overcome these problems dur-
ing investigation of neural function in planarian flat-
worms and frog larvae, we designed and developed a pro-
totype for an inexpensive, flexible system that enables
automated control and analysis of behavior and learning.
Applicable to a variety of small animals such as flatworms
and zebrafish, this system allows automated analysis of
innate behavior, as well as of learning and memory in a
plethora of conditioning paradigms. We present here the
schematics of a basic prototype, which overcomes experi-
menter effects and operator tedium, enabling a large
number of animals to be analyzed with transparent
on-line access to primary data. A scaled-up version of
this technology represents an efficient methodology to
screen pharmacological and genetic libraries for novel
neuroactive reagents of basic and biomedical rele-
vance. ©2006 Wiley Periodicals, Inc. J Neurobiol 66: 977-990, 2006
Keywords: automated behavior analysis; learning; mem-
ory; testing; screening

[PAGE 1] INTRODUCTION
The current challenge before modern cognitive sci-
ence is to understand and integrate the processes that
span from the molecular genetics establishing the
structure of the nervous system to the information
processing mechanisms that give rise to behavior and
thought. The biomedical aspect of this program in-
cludes the search for useful neuromodulatory drugs
and the understanding of the effects of various influ-
ences on normal cognition. Fundamental advances
on these tasks require analysis of behavior in a vari-
ety of genetically and pharmacologically modified
organisms. However, assessing behavior manually
places significant limitations on experimental prog-
ress. These restrictions include the limited number of
animals that may be analyzed by hand, the experi-
menter effects inherent in manual handling and obser-
vation by different individuals, and the difficulty in
allowing other groups to analyze all of the primary
data and potentially uncover trends missed by the
experimenters.

[PAGE 2] Indeed, these problems have been instrumental in
a number of controversies in neurobiology. For exam-
ple, the lack of consensus on the learning ability of
planarian flatworms, and in particular on the ability
of memories to persist during the regeneration of the
central nervous system, was due in large part to small
sample sizes necessitated by the tedium of training
worms by hand, the inevitable but often important
small differences in handling by different experi-
menters (observer bias, oversensitization of subject
animals from handling), inconsistencies in exact pro-
tocols and controls, and the difficulties in making all
of the primary data available to other groups in the
field (Thompson, 1955; Corning, 1961; Cornwell,
1961; Humphries, 1961; Best, 1963; Lee, 1963; Mur-
phy, 1963; Roe, 1963; Stephen, 1963; Wells, 1963;
Hartry et al., 1964; McConnell, 1965; Jacobson,
1966; Chapoutier, 1967; Ungar, 1974; Sarnat, 1985).
Driven by our lab's desire to mechanistically investi-
gate memory during regeneration and tissue remodel-
ing (McConnell, 1959, 1965; Corning, 1961; Best,
1963; Sheiman and Tiras, 1996), and to understand
behavioral function in Xenopus larvae and flatworms
whose large-scale CNS structure was altered by mo-
lecular or epigenetic manipulations during embryo-
genesis and regeneration (Nogi and Levin, 2005), we
pursued the development of an automated system for
the analysis of behavior.
A useful paradigm for such analysis necessitates
the following properties: (a) it must be applicable to
powerful genetic model systems such as zebrafish,
Xenopus, and flatworms (as current efforts for auto-
mation of behavioral analysis are almost exclusively
focused on rodents); (b) it must allow analysis of
multiple animals simultaneously for larger sample
sizes; (c) it must be fully automated to exclude exper-
imenter effects and subjective scoring, thus allowing
consistent reproducibility of experimental paradigms
across labs; (d) it must allow convenient usage of
essential control conditions (e.g., yoked controls);
and (e) it must record all primary data so that it can
be easily made available on-line for analysis by
reviewers and other labs.
A number of previous efforts have been made in
attempts to automate behavioral experiments. While
the majority focused on rodents (Torello et al., 1983;
Sanberg et al., 1985; Hulsey and Martin, 1991; Ma-
drid et al., 1995; Valentinuzzi et al., 1998; Boisvert
and Sherry, 2000; Nielsen and Crnic, 2002), some
have addressed smaller organisms (McConnell et al.,
1960; Lee, 1963; Corning and Freed, 1968; Tiras and
Aslanidi, 1981; Sadauskas and Shuranova Zh, 1982;
Fernandez de Miguel et al., 1989). We sought to
improve these systems using more modern computer
and optical technology, to design a system ideally
suited for molecularly tractable model systems, and
to incorporate a crucial additional property: scal-
ability.
A number of academic and commercial pharma-
ceutical projects have generated large genetic, proteo-
mic, or small-molecule (drug) libraries that must be
screened to identify compounds of interest to both
biomedicine and basic biology (Bensing et al., 2001;
Goodnow, 2001; Katayama et al., 2001; Koide et al.,
2001; MacNeil et al., 2001; Nuttall, 2001; Cheung
et al., 2002). Cell culture or simple organisms like
yeast (Kirsch, 1993; Chen and Zhao, 2003) are obvi-
ously insufficient for identifying compounds that
exert effects on complex multicellular systems or al-
ter nervous system function in desired ways. Screens
on multicellular model systems such as zebrafish
(Zon and Peterson, 2005) have been successful in
cell-biological assays, but the current necessity of
manual analysis precludes effectiveness in high-
throughput neurological screens. Thus, we pursued a
system that could be scaled to provide an extremely
powerful tool to biomedicine and neuropharmacology
by allowing automated screens in small animal model
systems for new compounds that, for example, in-
crease learning and cognitive ability, expand mem-
ory, are sedatives or stimulants, counteract effects of
neurotoxins, suppress pain, modulate the activity of
other psychoactive compounds, or serve as antidotes
to drug addiction.
Here, we present details on the design and con-
struction of a prototype system for the automated
analysis of behavior that meets all of the above crite-
ria. We also provide sample proof-of-principle data
obtained in a number of paradigms in planaria, to
illustrate the operation and applications of this system
to a model system that offers the advantage of a large
database of existing behavioral data. Past controver-
sies can be resolved using the proposed apparatus,
and it offers significant promise for exciting molecu-
lar investigations of memory and regeneration in the
same organism (Pietsch and Schneider, 1969, 1985,
1991).


[PAGE 2] MATERIALS AND METHODS
The species of planaria used in this study was Dugesia
tigrinia, obtained from Ward's Natural Science. Planaria
colonies were stored in rectangular plastic containers mea-
suring 22 × 22 × 7 cm and filled with Poland Springs natu-
ral spring water. The containers were stored in an incubator
at 22.5°C, and kept on a strict cycle of light (9:00 am to
6:00 pm) and dark (6:00 pm to 9:00 am) in order to facili-
tate colony health and expansion. Three planaria colonies
were kept at any one time. The colonies are fed once per
week with organic beef liver. The liver was purchased bian-
nually from Valley Livestock Marketing Co-op, liquefied in
a blender, and then frozen in teaspoon-sized aliquots. Prior
to feeding, an aliquot was thawed at room temperature and
then poured into the containers of planaria. The colonies
were allowed to feed for 3 h, after which the remaining
liver pieces are removed via pipette and discarded, and the
water was changed twice to remove any remaining debris.
The water was changed once again 3 days following feed-
ing in order to remove excess slime build-up and to replen-
ish the oxygen supply. On any given week only two of the
three planaria colonies were fed, because planaria that were
starved for a week were better for training, as they were less
likely to spontaneously fission. The health of the planaria
colonies was maintained through careful observation; they
were viewed regularly under a dissecting microscope to
monitor for any lesions or discoloration. If a colony became
sick, it was transferred to a new container filled with spring
water that was treated with 1 mL/L gentomycin (Invitro-
gen). The treatment continued daily for 1-3 weeks, until the
symptoms disappeared.
For the duration of an experiment, individual worms
were placed into a cell [Fig. 1(A)] and not fed during the
experiment. Each cell consisted of a plastic Petri dish; elec-
trodes for the delivery of current were made of a 90/10%
platinum/iridium alloy (a biologically compatible, inert ma-
terial that gives off no electrolysis products) and were con-
structed flush with the edge of the dish (so as not to create
any corners in which worms could get stuck). Other details
are given in the figure legends. For the drug experiments,
compounds made from stock solutions were dissolved in
Poland Spring water and worms were kept in the compound
throughout the experiment.
The camera used was a PixeLink Pl-A661 (mono-
chrome, 1.3 Megapixel resolution), with a Kowa HR F1.4/
12 mm flatfield lens. The PC controlling the prototype de-
vice was a Dell Dimension 4600 with Windows 2000 Pro
and a FireWire PCI card. The software controlling the de-
vice was written and run within Matlab v7.1 with image ac-
quisition toolbox. The red LEDs ranged from 0-3.75 V;
white LEDs ranged from 0.5-3.75 V (providing 7 Lux from
the red LEDs and 315 Lux from the four white LEDs). The
shocks ranged from 0-10.5 V DC; this range was chosen
empirically based on shocks that result in a visible reaction
in the worms (contraction and avoidance movements)
but do not impair the health of the worms when applied
repeatedly.

[PAGE 3] RESULTS
Basic Schematic of Device
The basic concept of the device is a series of Skinner
cells monitored by a digital camera (Figs. 1 and 2).
Each cell has one animal. The main point is that the
environment in each cell is individually controlled by
the software depending on the behavior of the animal
within. The animals are shielded from external stim-
uli. A weak light out of the band of spectral sensitiv-
ity of the worms (far red) allows observation of ani-
mal position at all times. The current prototype (opti-
mized for work with planaria) contains the ability to
expose experimental animals to stimuli including one
to four dish quadrants illuminated by bright light and
a set of electrodes allowing electric shocks to be
delivered to the water inside the cell. The mechanical
design enables standard disposable plastic Petri
dishes to be utilized inside each cell. The existing de-
vice is ideal for a plethora of experiments in any
aqueous model species; modifications to adjust the
device to a specific application are discussed below.
A number of specific construction details are im-
portant. The shock must be kept at constant current;
thus, if the overall chamber resistance changes with
time due to mucus deposition, the strength of the
shock will remain level throughout the training pe-
riod. Each cell lid is covered with an opaque material
to allow different lighting conditions among the cells.
LEDs are used to provide light but no heat to the
quadrants individually. A rectangular array of 3 × 4
such cells are located within the view of a digital
camera, which represents the main input to the soft-
ware. The output, sent as text strings over the com-
puter's serial port, contains instructions controlling
the state of a custom processing unit that exists as a
separate printed circuit. This is a state machine that
interprets the incoming control message and sets the
lights, electric shock, and other parameters in each
dish according to their respective bits (established by
the software, depending on the particular behavioral
paradigm being used).

[PAGE 4] The basic algorithm, implemented in the Matlab
software platform, consists of the following steps
(schematized in Fig. 3), performed in an iterative
loop throughout the length of the experiment. An
image is obtained of the animals in their dishes and
parsed as follows to identify the centroid of each
worm. Each animal's position and orientation is calcu-
lated by image-processing code containing the follow-
ing transformations in order: background subtraction,
morphological top-hat filtering using a diamond-
structured element, conversion to binary (pixel inten-
sity threshold of 0.9), binary area opening operation
(removes small islands of white that are smaller than
10 pixels), dilation of remaining white pixels to con-
nect any pixels in close proximity and to smooth out
edges of white islands, majority elimination of re-
maining pixel spots (sets a pixel to 1 if five or more
pixels in its 3-by-3 neighborhood are 1's; otherwise,
it sets the pixel to 0).
The software then makes a decision (based on the
details of the experiment as defined by the user before
the start of the run) for each animal, as to whether it
is to be rewarded or punished (via a brief electric
shock to the water and/or an appropriate change in
light conditions), or to receive no action. The position
of each animal along with the action taken is recorded
as a time-stamped record in an Excel spreadsheet,
and the image taken of the dish is saved as a frame in
an MPEG movie file. This process continues until the
experiment is terminated by the experimenter or a
predefined condition is reached.
A graphical user-interface to the software allows
the user to define the experimental paradigm. This
system can be used in two main modes: simple be-
havioral observation and analysis, and instrumental/
classical conditioning paradigms. The former can be
used to study actograms or assay light responses. The
latter can be used to create a consistent environment
where specific behaviors are encouraged. For exam-
ple, the software might punish prolonged inactivity,
location in a particular part of the dish, or more com-
plicated relationships (sample tasks include: “when-
ever your quadrant is lit up, move to the next one to
the left or be shocked"; or, "when the light comes
on, you have 5 s to move to a spot within 5 mm from
a wall"; or, "stay on a small agarose pad placed in
the dish"). The possibilities are practically unlimited.


[PAGE 5] Controls are set up by having a given animal's cell
receive random stimuli (or those linked to the behav-
ior of a master animal in a yoked control). Sensitiza-
tion controls are easily handled (by specifying regular
intervals of either light, shock, or both stimuli), and
innate preferences are controlled by training half of
the animals on a task opposite to the others (to avoid
light vs. darkness for example), or by prescreening
using 12 h observation periods and assigning alter-
nate tasks to train against the preference, or by elimi-
nating animals not meeting the behavioral criteria of
a given paradigm. The main concept is that having
set up such an environment, the computer automati-
cally keeps track of the behavior of each animal. At
any point during the trial, the experimenter can
observe the progress of the experiment: the data,
stored in Microsoft Excel format, allows easy plots of
performance versus time for each animal, variability
among animals, time spent in light versus darkness,
total distance traveled by each animal, activity level
throughout the experiment, percentage of time pres-
ent in any given area of the dish, and so forth. Also
important are the QuickTime format movies of each
dish, allowing time-lapse or real-time observation of
exactly what each animal was doing at each point in
the experiment. The frames of the movie are cross-
referenced to the Excel processed data, so that any
given period can be examined (and verified to ensure
accurate data collection and interpretation by a given
algorithm). The movie frames are also annotated with
marks so that invisible events (such as electric
shocks) are seen in the movie.
This system provides a number of immediate
advantages. First and foremost, this provides com-
plete consistency among labs replicating experiments,
and removes experimenter bias in scoring behaviors.
As long as a set of starting parameters is published
with the results, any group will be able to independ-
ently run the same experiment. Second, because the
procedure is fully automated, no user involvement is
needed during the experiment—no blind (or double-
blind) protocols are required, and the experiment can
go on for weeks, involving millions of observations
and training iterations/reinforcement (resulting in a
training level exponentially beyond what can realisti-
cally be accomplished by hand). The removal of op-
erator tedium results not only in extremely robust
data with significant sample sizes, but allows much
stronger learning in a consistent environment than
usually results from a small number of training trials

[PAGE 6] 982 Hicks et al.
that can be achieved manually in a given day. More-
over, because animals do not have to be handled dur-
ing the experiment, this avoids sensitization to han-
dling and confounding stimuli (animals may not like
new environments and may act differently when they
are moved from their "home" colony to a testing
paradigm).

Third, any interested independent observer can
view the progress of the experiment; if allowed by
access controls, this can be done in real-time over the
web. This means that many different groups can ana-
lyze data, and potentially uncover trends and relation-
ships unforeseen by the original experimenter. The
extensive data logging also allows other scientists to
analyze all of the primary data, increasing the likeli-
hood that others will discover novel trends via data-
mining the original dataset. This can be particularly
crucial when a set of rare (e.g., mutant) animals is
being studied that cannot easily be duplicated outside
a given lab. It also has important implications for
low-budget high-school or undergraduate educational
institutions because hundreds of students could have
access to behavioral data being generated by such a
device in a primary research institution.

Potential uses of this system are numerous. In its
simplest mode, it can be used to provide detailed
analyses of animals' innate behavior and light prefer-
ences. By focusing on actogram measurements and
conducting experiments at longer time-scales, experi-
ments on circadian cycles can be greatly facilitated
(Brown and Park, 1964). In the training paradigm,
properties of memory and learning can be studied.
One of the key features of this system is that the para-
digms can be made incentive-based, which in many
systems can produce very robust learning because the
animals have the opportunity to avoid punishment by
noticing patterns in their environment. Once a robust
memory is formed, pharmacological, surgical, or mo-
lecular-biological interventions can be performed,
and the recall can be automatically tested, enabling
powerful analyses of the mechanisms of memory
storage.


[PAGE 6] Sample Data: Proof of Principle
Our lab focuses on understanding biophysical control
mechanisms during morphogenesis; one of the model
systems we use is the free-living flatworm Planaria
(P. Platylhelmenthes, C. Turbellaria), which offers
the unique ability to study regeneration and memory
in the same organism. We have chosen to illustrate
the function of this behavioral analysis system with
proof-of-principle data in the planaria model system

[PAGE 7] for a number of reasons. Planaria exhibit much of the
complexity of vertebrate systems: a well-differenti-
ated nervous system, intestine, eyes, brain, three tis-
sue layers, and bilateral symmetry (Bronsted, 1969;
Sanchez Alvarado, 2004). Planaria possess a well-
developed nervous system with true synaptic trans-
mission and have what can be considered the first ani-
mal 'brain" (Sarnat and Netsky, 1985). They have
also developed sensory capabilities for the detection
of light (Brown et al., 1968; Brown and Park, 1975)
and other modalities (Brown and Park, 1964; Brown,
1966; Brown and Ogden, 1968; Fulgheri and Messeri,
1973; Brown and Chow, 1975; Mason, 1975; Miya-
moto and Shimozawa, 1985). Planaria have been
shown to exhibit learning and memory under classical
conditioning paradigms as well as to perform more
complex tasks requiring a surprising degree of intelli-
gence (such as operant or instrumental conditioning);
they also possess many of the neurotransmitters,
receptors, and behaviors associated with higher cog-
nition (McConnell et al., 1960; Jacobson, 1962;
McConnell, 1965; Block and McConnell, 1967;
Smith, 1985; Creti et al., 1992; Villar and Schaeffer,
1993; Eriksson and Panula, 1994; Sheiman and Tiras,
1996). They are an ideal organism for screening
because they are small, and easy to raise and to sub-
ject to a multitude of reagents and manipulations.
Moreover, evolutionarily, they are very similar to the
ancestor of the bilateria clade, and have high rele-
vance to human medicine and physiology both struc-
turally and physiologically (Best and Morita, 1982;
Sarnat and Netsky, 1985). Planaria offer an excellent
combination of experimental tractability and suffi-
cient complexity for asking a number of fascinating
questions about basic functions of living systems
(Eisenstein, 1997). Crucially, as a model system, pla-
naria are quickly acquiring a powerful set of molecu-
lar biological reagents and techniques, enabling
genetic and cell-biological investigations into their
structure and function (Cebria et al., 2002; Sanchez
Alvarado et al., 2002; Agata et al., 2003).

One of the most common protocols for demonstra-
tion of memory is to train an animal against its nor-
mal preference, because this can result in the greatest
difference between controls and trained individuals.
Therefore, to demonstrate a prescreening function as
well as the use of this system for noninvasive behav-
ioral observation and analysis, we began with a sim-
ple observe trial. A population of worms was moni-
tored to ascertain the amount of time each animal
spent in the light versus dark quadrants of a cell
(Fig. 4). Interestingly, while a majority of the worms
did indeed prefer darkness (consistent with the com-
mon wisdom about worm behavior; Walter, 1907;


[PAGE 8] Reynierse, 1967), a significant percentage of our ani-
mals preferred light. This is important because if
these individuals were used for a "learn to stay in the
light' study, their native preference would reduce the
difference between trained and untrained worms.
Thus, this method allows the experimenter to rapidly
select animals from a population for training; one
might train the animals in the left-most photo-phobic
bin for spending time in the light, while training the
animals from the right-most photo-philic bin for
spending time in the darkness.

The apparatus facilitates study of spatial relation-
ships. It is easy to add agarose pads, mazes, miniature
platforms, or other spatial cues for animals and
reward spending time in a particular location within
the dish. We chose the simple dichotomy provided by
each worm's being horizontal, on the bottom surface
of a dish, versus turned 90°, sitting on the vertical
edge of a dish. We trained worms using a yoked con-
trol paradigm after prescreening for worms that, when
left to their own devices, spent time on the dishes'
walls. After 24 h of training (Fig. 5), where worms
were punished with shock for being located on the
edge, the worms were significantly more likely (p <
0.001) to spend time on the bottom of the dish-
against their normal preference. Thus, the animals
can sense their orientation and associate it with the


[PAGE 9] punishment. In a similar paradigm, we explored the
ability to learn visual cues. An even more profound
level of learning could be obtained in worms (Fig. 6)
prescreened for photo-avoidance and trained to spend
time in the light; the trained (but not the yoked con-
trol) worms changed from 10% light exposure to
almost 100% light exposure within 3 days of training
(p < 6 × 10¯º). This learning paradigm can also be
analyzed in terms of latency (time elapsed or number
of trials before a series of correct responses); an
example of such data is shown in Figure 7.
[PAGE 9] Worm Learning Latencies: Go Light Training

Finally, we studied long-term retention (asking
whether the memory formed during these experi-
ments is retained for significant time periods after the
training ends; Fig. 8). Our data demonstrate that
almost perfect performance is retained after 7 days of
rest following a 3 day training period. This result sup-
ports our contention that a consistent environment
that automatically rewards and punishes various
behaviors avails the experimenter of an extremely ro-
bust memory for subsequent experiments. The classi-
cal planarian memory experiments done by hand

[PAGE 9] were very tedious (especially to obtain the large dif-
ferences between trained and control worms) and
memory recall was analyzed as “savings”-how fast
a trained animal could relearn the task (Jacobson,
1962; McConnell, 1965). In this system, even after 7
days of rest in an environment where the target
behavior was not reinforced, the worms remembered
their task very well and did not require retraining.
Moreover, the retention of the memory for 7 days is
long enough for cut worms to regenerate, opening the
possibility to study memory and brain regeneration in
the same model system (McConnell et al., 1959).

As a final example, we sought to illustrate the use
of this device to assay the effects of psychiatric drugs
on worm behavior. A number of previous studies
demonstrated that neuromodulatory reagents used in
mammalian systems also have the expected effects
on planarian behavior (Algeri et al., 1983; Sarnat and
Netsky, 1985; Kitamura et al., 2003; Raffa and Mart-
ley, 2005). We selected two compounds, p-chloro-
phenylalanine (PCPA) and reserpine—two modula-
tors of serotonergic signaling that are known to have
effects on activity levels (Garattini and Valzelli,
1958; Georgiev and Petkova, 1975; Hussey et al.,
1983). Figure 9 illustrates a simple actogram analysis,
where overall mobility of the worms was tracked (see
Supplements 1-3 at http://server.drmichaellevin.org/
worm_supplement.html for real-time movies of the
worm behavior in each condition). While the data
revealed significant variation among animals, the
PCPA and reserpine, respectively, increased and
decreased the locomotor activity level compared to
controls. Thus, this system can be fruitfully used to
analyze the effects of known and as-yet-uncharacter-
ized compounds on behavior (as well as learning rate,
retention, etc.).

[PAGE 9] DISCUSSION

Using the planaria model, we performed a number of
different studies designed to illustrate the use of the
automated behavioral analysis system. The automated
nature of the process made it easy to test different
paradigms and parameters (strength of shock, light
levels, timing of training and rest periods, etc.).
Moreover, by designating some of the dishes as con-
trols and assigning yoke relationships, it was easy to
compare animals undergoing training at the same
time (thus minimizing the effects of environmental,
circadian, and other confounding factors). While
these data demonstrate multiple uses of this system
for investigating memory and behavior in planaria,
we believe this same paradigm can be used, with min-
imal modifications, with a wide variety of experimen-
tal model systems.

The experiments above surely raise many further
questions about planarian ethology; there is much
room for improvement and tantalizing directions for
further studies of behavior and its genetic and epige-
netic basis (the worms used in this study were wild-
caught, but clonal isogenic animals can also be used
to investigate the endogenous variability in cognitive
function). Work currently in preparation will report
primary data addressing the relationship between
memory and regeneration in planaria and vertebrate
model systems. Our goal here was not to derive con-
clusive answers about planarian learning, but rather
to illustrate practical use of the system we have
designed in the hopes that it will be utilized and
extended by others. The planarian data demonstrate
that this basic system provides automated analysis of
[PAGE 9] behavior in real time, can be used to train and test
animals in memory experiments, and allows the eval-
uation of the behavioral effects of neuroactive com-
pounds.
Crucially, this system is ideally suited to screening
applications. When scaled up, in addition to facilitat-
ing inquiry into basic mechanisms of animal learning,
this system is usable for screens of compounds that
alter behavior. In this paradigm, each cell would
receive one of the library's compounds to be tested
dissolved in the water. The software would then ena-
ble the search for reagents that increase activity
(stimulants), decrease movement (paralytics or seda-
tives), alter normal behavior in other well-defined
ways (e.g., render the animals more or less sensitive
to environmental stimuli such as light or weak elec-
tric shock), increase learning rate, memory retention,
or intelligence (ability to abstract more complex pat-
terns from their environments), and so forth. More-
over, if each cell contains the same basic reagent,
plus one element from a library, the system can be
used to screen that library for compounds that aug-
ment or counteract the activity of that reagent. This
can be used to search for new antitoxins, drugs that
prevent or ameliorate addiction, or reagents that mod-
ulate the activity of other psychoactive compounds.
In addition to screening drug libraries for drugs to
modulate endogenous processes, use of this system in
genetically tractable model systems (such as those
amenable to RNAi-based inhibition) will allow
screens to identify endogenous gene products with
roles in important aspects of cognitive function and
nervous system activity. The ability to identify com-
pounds and genes involved in these processes could
significantly contribute to biomedical efforts address-
ing brain disorders, security threats from neurotoxin
exposure, and treatment of drug abuse.
During the construction, testing, and use of this
device a number of planned modifications have been
formulated. We are currently developing a system
with the following improvements. First, the basic sys-
tem should have an individual CMOS camera under-
neath each cell. This would not only allow the whole
system to be much smaller (height will be reduced by
stacking trays of cells, because vertical height won't
be required to provide a complete field of view for a
single camera), but would allow higher-resolution
imaging. This will enable the use of this system for

[PAGE 10] Worm Learning and Memory Retention:
Go Light Training

much smaller organisms, such as C. elegans. The
camera sensitivity and LEDs should be increased in
spectral width so that fluorescently tagged organisms
can be tracked. Fluorescent markers that highlight a
particular group of cells, organs, or neuronal paths
(Offield et al., 2000; Haycraft et al., 2001) will make
it easy for the software to identify mutants or drugs
that alter the normal pattern. Moreover, physiological
screens can be carried out by devices that measure
the fluorescence of vital or reporter dyes, such as pH-
and voltage-sensitive dyes (Buckler and Vaughan-
Jones, 1990; Seksek et al., 1991; van Erp et al., 1991;
Epps et al., 1994), which can give specific informa-
tion on in vivo processes in real time. For example,
screens using voltage- and pH-sensitive fluorescent
dyes are easily envisioned to identify drugs that
change the pH of specific tissues, or mutants resistant
to the membrane-depolarizing effects of common


[PAGE 13] 
toxins such as polytoxin (Yamashita et al., 2000;
Naitoh et al., 2001).
Aside from these generally useful enhancements, a
number of changes can be made to modify the system
for use with other systems and novel experimental
paradigms. The individual cells can be fitted with
sensors for specific chemicals (dissolved oxygen,
waste products, pH sensors, toxins, etc.) to monitor or
screen for any desired physiological reaction (Epstein
and Walt, 2003; Mano et al., 2003; Thrush et al.,
2003; Lee et al., 2004; Popovtzer et al., 2005; Tian
et al., 2005; Zhang et al., 2005). The image analysis
software could be augmented with morphometric
analysis modules (Klingenberg et al., 1998; Klingen-
berg and Zaklan, 2000; Albertson and Kocher, 2001),
allowing more sophisticated changes in neural mor-
phology to be followed (especially when used in
combination with high-resolution imaging and fluo-
rescent tracing labeling of neural components).
Depending on the species used (and its visual sys-
tem), the spectral qualities of the LEDs may need to
be changed. Vibration can easily be added to the
environment of each cell (using piezzoelectrics and
dampening insulation between cells), as can Peltier
thermocouples to provide temperature differences as
stimuli or reward/punishment.
The use of this automated technology will not only
reveal much about the cognitive properties of many
different species, but will also allow the rapid deriva-
tion of high- and low-intelligence strains, the analysis
of which in genetically tractable model systems will
provide important insights into