Target-agnostic discovery of Rett Syndrome therapeutics by coupling
computational network analysis and CRISPR-enabled *in vivo* disease modeling

Novak, R.1,†,*, Lin, T.1,*, Kaushal, S.1, Sperry, M.1, Vigneault, F.1,†, Gardner, E.1,†, Loomba, S.1,
Shcherbina, K.1, Keshari, V.1, Dinis, A.1, Vasan, A.1, Chandrasekhar, V.1, Takeda, T.1, Turner,
J.R. 2, Levin, M. 1,3, Ingber, D.E. 1,4,5,#

1 Wyss Institute for Biologically Inspired Engineering, Harvard University, Boston, MA, USA
2 Laboratory of Mucosal Barrier Pathobiology, Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women's
Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA
3 Allen Discovery Center at Tufts University, Medford, MA, USA
4 Harvard John A. Paulson School of Engineering and Applied Sciences, Harvard University,
Cambridge, MA, USA
5 Vascular Biology Program and Department of Surgery, Boston Children's Hospital and Harvard
Medical School, Boston, MA, USA
†Present address: Unravel Biosciences, Inc., Boston, MA, USA
* Contributed equally to this manuscript
# Corresponding author:
Donald E. Ingber, MD, PhD
Wyss Institute at Harvard University
CLSB5, 3 Blackfan Circle
Boston, MA, 02115 USA
E-mail: don.ingber@wyss.harvard.edu

[PAGE 2] ABSTRACT
Many neurodevelopmental genetic disorders, such as Rett syndrome, are caused
by a single gene mutation but trigger changes in expression and regulation of numerous
other genes. This severely impair functions of multiple organs and organ systems
beyond the central nervous system (CNS), adding to the challenge of developing broadly
effective treatments based on a single drug target. This challenge is further complicated
by the lack of sufficiently broad and biologically relevant drug screens, and the inherent
complexity in identifying clinically relevant targets responsible for diverse phenotypes.
Here, we combined human gene regulatory network-based computational drug prediction
with *in vivo* screening in a population-level diversity, CRISPR-edited, *Xenopus laevis*
tadpole model of Rett syndrome to carry out target-agnostic drug discovery, which
rapidly led to the identification of the FDA-approved drug vorinostat as a potential
repurposing candidate. Vorinostat broadly improved both CNS and non-CNS (e.g.,
gastrointestinal, respiratory, inflammatory) abnormalities in a pre-clinical mouse model
of Rett syndrome. This is the first Rett syndrome treatment to demonstrate pre-clinical
efficacy across multiple organ systems when dosed after the onset of symptoms, and
network analysis revealed a putative therapeutic mechanism for its cross-organ
normalizing effects based on its impact on acetylation metabolism and post-translational
modifications of microtubules. Although traditionally considered an inhibitor of histone
deacetylases (HDAC), vorinostat unexpectedly restored protein acetylation across both
hypo- and hyperacetylated tissues, suggesting non-HDAC-mediated therapeutic
mechanisms supported by proteomic analysis.

[PAGE 3] INTRODUCTION
Rett Syndrome (Rett) is a neurodevelopmental disorder that is also known to clinically
impact multiple organs and systems in the body. It is primarily caused by mutations of the gene
encoding methyl-CpG binding protein (MeCP2), a ubiquitous nuclear protein that acts as a
transcriptional repressor and activator affecting hundreds of genes across the genome
(Chahrour and Zoghbi, 2007). Rett is characterized by a high degree of cellular heterogeneity,
with a mixture of wild type and MeCP2 mutant cells within the tissues of the same individual
(Renthal et al., 2018) that leads to subtle but widespread gene misregulation (Gabel et al.,
2015). Clinical criteria and research on Rett have primarily focused on neuromotor, social, and
cognitive impairments and other CNS symptoms (e.g., seizures, repetitive purposeless
movements, regression, microcephaly, loss of speech, autistic features)(Colvin et al., 2003; Kerr
et al., 2001). However, these patients also commonly exhibit multiple clinical symptoms outside
of the CNS, including respiratory dysfunction, gastrointestinal issues, systemic inflammation,
disrupted metabolism, circadian rhythm and sleep disturbances, abnormal bone density, kidney
function, nociception derangement, which are a major source of morbidity that contribute to a
shortened lifespan (Hagberg, 2002; Vashi and Justice, 2019). It is important to note that
although Rett is considered a neurodevelopmental disorder and therapeutics development has
focused on CNS-related endpoints, these system-wide symptoms are often the most disturbing
to patients and families, and thus there is a need to ameliorate symptoms of this disease across
the entire body.
Monogenic diseases are theoretically amenable to gene therapy treatment, and Rett has
been shown to be reversible in a mouse model of X chromosome reactivation (Przanowski et
al., 2018) and post-natal expression of MeCP2 (Giacometti et al., 2007; Guy et al., 2007).
However, even if current challenges around delivery efficacy and safety could be overcome,
Rett and other X-linked disorders require gene dosage compensation to avoid toxicity due to
overexpression of the corrected gene since even a modest 20% deviation of MeCP2 expression
levels can lead to Rett symptoms (Collins et al., 2004; Luikenhuis et al., 2004). Therefore,
pharmaceutical treatments for Rett and other neurodevelopmental disorders are still needed.
Trofinetide, a synthetic IGF-1 C-terminal tripeptide activating BDNF expression, has shown
initial promise in phase II clinical trials and it progressed to phase III trials but demonstrated only
moderate efficacy (Glaze et al., 2017). Sarizotan, a 5-HT1A and D2 receptor agonist with
promising efficacy in mouse models of Rett (Abdala et al., 2014), was recently terminated after
clinical trial results failed to demonstrate efficacy (NCT02790034). Esketamine, an N-methyl D-
aspartate receptor (NMDAR) agonist, is also being evaluated in the clinic (NCT03633058) due
to its reduction of neuroexcitatory glutamate. But these and other therapeutic paths for Rett
pursued thus far target only a subset of patients' CNS symptoms and have not shown any
effects on extra-CNS morbidity.
Here we present an integrated approach combining a novel gene expression network
computational model to predict existing drugs and screening in an *in vivo* phenotypically diverse
model of Rett syndrome generated in *Xenopus* tadpoles to assess whole-body efficacy. Our
results led to the identification of vorinostat, which showed significant efficacy in a mouse Rett
syndrome model even when initiating treatment after the onset of symptoms, demonstrating the
utility of the target-agnostic platform for predicting drugs to restore multi-organ system function
in Rett syndrome and potentially other complex diseases.

[PAGE 4] METHODS
*X. laevis* care and rapid generation of Rett syndrome tadpole models
*Xenopus* embryos and tadpoles were housed at 18°C with a 12/12 h light/dark cycle in
0.1X Marc's Modified Ringer's (MMR) medium. Tadpoles were fed 3x/week with sera Micron
Nature fry food. All animal experiments and procedures were reviewed and approved by the
Harvard Medical School (HMS) Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee regulations.
Xenbase (Nenni et al., 2019) (www.xenbase.org) was used to search for MeCP2 homolog in
*Xenopus laevis* (*Xenopus laevis* J-strain 9.2 version). MeCP2.L (XB-GENE-17346751),
MeCP2.S (XB-GENE-494744), found on Chromosome 8L and 8S, show 75% and 70%
sequence identity with human MeCP2, respectively. An important biological distinction is that
while human MeCP2 is found on the X chromosome, Chromosome 8 is not part of the sex
determination alleles of homomorphic chromosome pairs in *X. laevis*. Cas9 target sites were
selected using CHOPCHOP (Labun et al., 2016) on the *X. laevis* J-strain 9.2 version, which
facilitated the selection of guide RNA with no predicted off-targets. We used the default settings
to generate a list of target sequences. We selected 4 targets from this list for each of the L and
S forms. This selection was based primarily on the ranking provided by CHOPCHOP and as a
function of their location on MeCP2 to target exons coding for the methyl-CpG-binding domain
(MBD, exons 2 and 3) and Transcriptional repression domain (TRD, exon 3). The 8 sgRNA
sequences are presented in Supplementary Table 9 and were synthesized as modified sgRNA
by Synthego Inc.
The sgRNA were resuspended to 100 μM in 0.1X Tris EDTA (pH 8.0). Then, an
equimolar sgRNA mix was made using 2 µl of each sgRNA, for a total of 16 ul. The Cas9 RNP
complex was formed by mixing 75 pmol of the sgRNA mix with 75 pmol of Cas9 in annealing
buffer (5 mM HEPES, 50 mM KCI, pH 7.5), for a total volume of 100 µL, then incubated at 37°C
for 10 minutes. The RNP was kept frozen at -20°C until the day of the injection. To generate
MeCP2 knockdown models of Rett syndrome, *Xenopus* embryos were fertilized and maintained
at 14°C until the 4-cell stage. Each cell was injected with ~2 nL RNP per injection resulting in a
final amount of 1.5 fmol of RNP per injection per cell, and we did not see any adverse effect
when controlling for Cas9 or sgRNA at that amount. Note that the 1.5 fmol of ribonucleoprotein

Nature fry food. All animal experiments and procedures were reviewed and approved by the
Harvard Medical School (HMS) Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee regulations.
Xenbase (Nenni et al., 2019) (www.xenbase.org) was used to search for MeCP2 homolog in
Xenopus laevis (Xenopus laevis J-strain 9.2 version). MeCP2.L (XB-GENE-17346751),
MeCP2.S (XB-GENE-494744), found on Chromosome 8L and 8S, show 75% and 70%
sequence identity with human MeCP2, respectively. An important biological distinction is that
while human MeCP2 is found on the X chromosome, Chromosome 8 is not part of the sex
determination alleles of homomorphic chromosome pairs in X. laevis. Cas9 target sites were
selected using CHOPCHOP (Labun et al., 2016) on the X. laevis J-strain 9.2 version, which
facilitated the selection of guide RNA with no predicted off-targets. We used the default settings
to generate a list of target sequences. We selected 4 targets from this list for each of the L and
S forms. This selection was based primarily on the ranking provided by CHOPCHOP and as a
function of their location on MeCP2 to target exons coding for the methyl-CpG-binding domain
(MBD, exons 2 and 3) and Transcriptional repression domain (TRD, exon 3). The 8 sgRNA
sequences are presented in Supplementary Table 9 and were synthesized as modified sgRNA
by Synthego Inc.
The sgRNA were resuspended to 100 μM in 0.1X Tris EDTA (pH 8.0). Then, an
equimolar sgRNA mix was made using 2 µl of each sgRNA, for a total of 16 ul. The Cas9 RNP
complex was formed by mixing 75 pmol of the sgRNA mix with 75 pmol of Cas9 in annealing
buffer (5 mM HEPES, 50 mM KCI, pH 7.5), for a total volume of 100 µL, then incubated at 37°C
for 10 minutes. The RNP was kept frozen at -20°C until the day of the injection. To generate
MeCP2 knockdown models of Rett syndrome, Xenopus embryos were fertilized and maintained
at 14°C until the 4-cell stage. Each cell was injected with ~2 nL RNP per injection resulting in a
final amount of 1.5 fmol of RNP per injection per cell, and we did not see any adverse effect
when controlling for Cas9 or sgRNA at that amount. Note that the 1.5 fmol of ribonucleoprotein
(RNP) used per injection is two to five time less than what has been commonly used in
previously published studies for Xenopus (Aslan et al., 2017) as we found that higher amounts
of sgRNA had adverse effects (not shown). Following injections, embryos were kept in 0.1X
MMR at 18°C as described above, for the 18 days duration of the experiment.

[PAGE 6] PCR and fragment analysis to validate MeCP2 gene disruption
MeCP2 editing efficiency was measured using Indel Detection by Amplicon Analysis
(Yang et al., 2015), which leverages PCR using a pair of primers and universal fluorescein
labeled oligo (Supplementary Table 10). The primers were synthesized by IDT. The amplicons
were purified (Zymo Research) and submitted for fragment analysis on an ABI 3730XL
(performed by Genewiz) following the IDAA method described previously. ProfileIT IDAA
analysis software (COBO Technologies) was used to analyze the fragments and visualize the
distribution of indels and visualize out-of-frame indels (Lonowski et al., 2017). IDAA is a robust
method with 1-bp resolution suited for the analysis of a tetraploid genome without the need for a
deep sequencing approach.
We analyzed the indels of 3 target sites on MeCP2.S of 14 tadpoles presenting with
seizures and 3 non-edited tadpoles. Using a window of +/- 100 bp from the target site, we
observed varied editing efficiencies depending on the target site. The likely out-of-frame indels
ratio averaged 47% for Xl-mecp2s-g01 on exon 3, with the lowest being 12% for a given tadpole
and highest being 95%, 48% for Xl-mecp2s-g02 on exon 2 (min/max 20-84%), and ~82% for XI-
mecp2s-g04 on exon 2 (min/max 7-91%). Overall, 98% of indels where between 1 to 30 bp, and
84% were deletions.

[PAGE 6] Microarray analysis
Tadpoles were sacrificed at stage 50 of development and lysed using a QIAGEN
TissueLyser II bead mill (30 Hz, 2 x 30 sec) in a 2 mL tube with a 2.4 mm steel beads (Omni)
and 1 mL phosphate buffered saline buffer at 4°C. 250 mL of lysate was used for RNA
extraction using a QIAGEN RNeasy mini kit. RNA samples were DNAse treated. Xenopus laevis
Genome 2.0 Array (Affymetrix) microarrays were processed by Advanced Biomedical
Laboratories (Cinnaminson, NJ). RNA samples were processed using a Nugen Ovation PICO
WTA System V2 kit. The resulting cDNAs were purified using a Qiagen MinElute PCR
Purification Kit following the modifications outlined in the Nugen protocol. The cDNAs were
fragmented and labeled using a Nugen Encore Biotin Module. Hybridization solutions were
prepared by combining the fragmented, biotin-labeled cDNAs with hybridization cocktail
(Affymetrix Hybridization, Wash, and Stain Kit). The mixtures were incubated in a thermal cycler
at 99 °C for 2 min followed by 45 °C for 5 min. then loaded on Xenopus laevis Genome 2.0
arrays and incubated for 16-20 hours at 45 °C and 60 rpm in an Affymetrix Hybridization Oven
645. Following hybridization, arrays were washed and stained on Affymetrix Fluidics Station
450s using the Affymetrix FS450_0001 protocol with the stains and buffers supplied in the
Affymetrix Hybridization, Wash, and Stain Kit. The stained arrays were scanned at 532 nm
using an Affymetrix GeneChip Scanner 3000.

[PAGE 7] Transcriptomics Data Processing
Microarray datasets were RMA normalized. RNAseq gene counts were normalized using
size factors similar to the normalization performed by the R package DESeq. Genes missing
values were removed and duplicates were combined by taking the maximum across counts.
Gene expression heatmaps and hierarchical clustering plots were generated for all groups using
the R package limma (version 3.42.2) and Python package seaborn (version 0.9.0). Volcano
plots were generated using the Python package bioinfokit (version 0.7).

[PAGE 7] nemoCAD Drug Prediction Algorithm
In the present study, we developed the nemoCAD computational tool to predict drugs
that would shift MeCP2-edited tadpoles to a control tadpole state based on transcriptome state
for each condition. nemoCAD utilizes pre-computed interaction probabilities of drug-gene and
gene-gene interactions and differential gene expression signatures of a disease state and
appropriate control to identify compounds capable of changing a transcriptional signature
indicative of one biological state to another state of interest (e.g., reverting a disease state to a
healthy state).
The repurposing algorithm is first used to identify transcriptome-wide differential
expression profiles between two biological states in the input transcriptomic dataset
(experimental or published) and to define the target normalization signature, i.e., the subset of
genes whose expression levels need to be reversed in order to revert one state to the other
(e.g., normalize the diseased state). Pairwise analysis, that implicitly assumes genes are
expressed independently of one another, is carried out based on the comparison between gene
expression profiles of >19,800 compounds found in the LINCS database release v1
(Subramanian et al., 2017) and the target normalization signature. Multiple correlation statistics
(e.g., Pearson correlation, cross-entropy) across all differentially expressed genes are
calculated and a combination score (e.g., Pearson correlation divided by the cross-entropy) is
computed.
Putative predictions that incorporate gene-gene dependencies are then generated
separately based on Bayesian network analysis on a regulatory and drug-gene interaction
network architecture defined using publicly available databases of gene-gene interactions based
on single gene knockout datasets in human cells (KEGG, TRRUST) and reference
transcriptional signatures of drugs (LINCS, CTD), as described below. By combining a directed
unweighted network structure with interaction probabilities for the connecting network edges,
the constructed network is a weighted directed graph consisting of all possible paths that
connect at least 2 genes of interest from the relevant genes within the target transcriptomic
normalization set and the drugs; it therefore encodes the entire region of influence of a given list
of genes and the drugs that can reverse their gene expression profiles in the desired manner.
This network is then used as input for a message-passing algorithm (e.g. loopy belief
propagation algorithm (Forbes, 2021; Pearl, 1982)) in which the marginal probability
distributions of drugs being “on” given the expression state of every gene are computed using
the joint probability distribution encoded in the . This network-based approach leads to a ranking
of all the drugs based on the probability of them inducing the desired transcriptomic signature
across all genes in the network, which is separate from the initial ranking based on correlation
analysis described above. This method has the advantage of incorporating gene-gene
dependencies, but its success relies on the quality of network structures curated in the source
databases.
Ultimately, drugs are prioritized that have both high correlation with the desired
transcriptional signature change, representing desired drug-gene interactions, and high
probabilities of being able to reverse the diseased state predicted by the Bayesian network
analysis, representing gene network-level drug effects that can counter network-level disease
processes. nemoCAD also enables visualization of the architecture of the network and
subnetworks, and thus provides insight into potential molecular targets that can be verified using
additional experiments. nemoCAD also can be used to optimize treatment regiments by
iteratively inputting animal omics data following drug treatment to further tune drug predictions
and develop drug combinations that might synergize in unpredictable ways. The approach
underlying nemoCAD avoids the needs for a priori target or pathway inputs and, in fact, enables
their discovery.

connect at least 2 genes of interest from the relevant genes within the target transcriptomic
normalization set and the drugs; it therefore encodes the entire region of influence of a given list
of genes and the drugs that can reverse their gene expression profiles in the desired manner.
This network is then used as input for a message-passing algorithm (e.g. loopy belief
propagation algorithm (Forbes, 2021; Pearl, 1982)) in which the marginal probability
distributions of drugs being “on” given the expression state of every gene are computed using
the joint probability distribution encoded in the . This network-based approach leads to a ranking
of all the drugs based on the probability of them inducing the desired transcriptomic signature
across all genes in the network, which is separate from the initial ranking based on correlation
analysis described above. This method has the advantage of incorporating gene-gene
dependencies, but its success relies on the quality of network structures curated in the source
databases.
Ultimately, drugs are prioritized that have both high correlation with the desired
transcriptional signature change, representing desired drug-gene interactions, and high
probabilities of being able to reverse the diseased state predicted by the Bayesian network
analysis, representing gene network-level drug effects that can counter network-level disease
processes. nemoCAD also enables visualization of the architecture of the network and
subnetworks, and thus provides insight into potential molecular targets that can be verified using
additional experiments. nemoCAD also can be used to optimize treatment regiments by
iteratively inputting animal omics data following drug treatment to further tune drug predictions
and develop drug combinations that might synergize in unpredictable ways. The approach
underlying nemoCAD avoids the needs for a priori target or pathway inputs and, in fact, enables
their discovery.

[PAGE 10] Transcriptomics Gene Network Construction

Gene regulatory networks were inferred from gene expression data using the
Bioconductor package GEne Network Inference with Ensemble of trees (GENIE3) release 3.12
in RStudio (R version 3.6.2)(Huynh-Thu et al., 2010). GENIE3 infers a weighted, directed gene
regulatory network from expression data by decomposing the prediction of a network between k
genes into k different regression problems. For each individual regression analysis, the
expression pattern of one of the genes (target gene) is predicted from the expression patterns of
all the other genes (regulator genes) using ensembles of regression trees. GENIE3 produces an
adjacency matrix representation of the network with k nodes in which each node represents a
gene, and an edge directed from one gene i to another gene j indicates that gene i regulates the
expression of gene j. Based on known mechanisms involved in Rett Syndrome
(Supplementary Table 1), a subset of genes was selected as candidate regulators: BDNF,
FCRL2, FMR1, MeCP2, NTRK2, PER1, PER2, and PUM1. These potential regulators were
calculated over all available target genes in the transcriptomics datasets (10,934 genes) for
MeCP2 knock down and cas9-injected control samples. Digraph objects were constructed from
adjacency matrices and visualized in Matlab R2020a (Mathworks; Natick, MA) for each of the
MeCP2 knock down and control groups. The strongest regulator gene-target gene relationships
were highlighted by filtering each network at a consistent edge weight (ew) threshold (ew = 0.3)
prior to plotting.

[PAGE 10] Cross-Species Transcriptomics Analysis

Gene networks involved in Rett Syndrome in human patients and MeCP2 knock down in
laboratory animal models were compared using previously acquired transcriptomics datasets
(Supplementary Table 2). Transcriptomics datasets were processed using the same methods
described for Xenopus transcriptomics and normalized using a series of transformations. Since
RNA-seq data typically have a wider dynamic range than microarray datasets, RNA-seq and
microarray data was transformed into a common space (Sekhon et al., 2013). RNA-seq
datasets were transformed using a hyperbolic sine function and the log2 transformation was
applied to microarray data (Sekhon et al., 2013). Subsequently, a variance stabilizing
transformation was applied to remove potential mean-variance relationships in each dataset
(Russo et al., 2018). Common genes expressed and measured between datasets (926 genes)
were considered for further analysis. Dimensional reduction was performed using Principle
Component Analysis (PCA) and visualized using Uniform Manifold Approximation and
Projection (UMAP) in Python with the help of sklearn and UMAP packages.

Commonalities in gene expression values across species were analyzed by plotting
heatmaps of differential gene expression using the Python packages seaborn and matplotlib. All
datasets were normalized as described above and log fold change for each gene was
calculated by combining samples of a condition using geometric mean. Log fold changes for all
species were combined and the genes (96 genes) with variance greater than the mean variance
(in fold changes) were used to construct the heatmaps.
Transcriptomics gene networks were constructed using GENIE3 and the same methods
previously described. To investigate potential changes across the entire gene network, regulator
genes were not down selected. Adjacency matrices were visualized for each network and the
distribution of edge weights in the network was assessed by histogram and boxplots in Matlab.
Digraph objects were constructed from adjacency matrices and visualized in Matlab for the
strongest connections in each network (ew > 99.99% for each network). Resultant networks
were combined across all datasets for each species and plotted with different colors designating
each dataset. A cross-species network that includes the strongest network connections across
all datasets was formed by combining each species-specific dataset and plotted with different
colors designating each species. To identify the strongest regulator and target gene nodes in
the resultant cross-species network, the in-degree and out-degree were calculated in Matlab.
The in-degree is defined as the number of edges with that node as the target and out-degree of
a node is equal to the number of edges with that node as the source.

[PAGE 12] Drug screening

Drugs for tadpole screening were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (St. Louis, MO, USA)
or MedChem Express (Monmouth Junction, NJ, USA) and dissolved in DMSO to a stock
concentration of 100-1,000 µM, depending on the solubility. For screens, compounds were
diluted to their final concentrations with a 0.1% DMSO concentration. Media with dosed drug
were made fresh and exchanged every two days following feeding. Dosing began at stage 45
and lasted for 7 days, after which standard 0.1X MMR was used to evaluate drug washout
effects. Free-swimming tadpoles were imaged in 60 mm dishes using a SONY Alpha a6100
camera with 16mm objective against an illuminated background. Tadpole behavior was scored
manually by noting the most severe seizure-related phenotype described by Hewapathirane et
al. (Hewapathirane et al., 2008) within a 20 min period.
Vorinostat and trofinetide for mouse studies were purchased from MedChem Express
(Monmouth Junction, NJ, USA). For intraperitoneal injection, trofinetide was solubilized in
DMSO, and vorinostat was solubilized in a method previously published(Basu et al., 2019;
Hockly et al., 2003). 2-hydroxypropyl-ẞ-cyclodextrin powder (HPẞCD) was purchased from
Acros Organics (ThermoFisher, Waltham, MA, USA). Vorinostat was dissolved in 100 mM
HPẞCD by boiling for 5 minutes. Mice were dosed intraperitoneally at 100mg/kg with Trofinetide
and 50 mg/kg with vorinostat. For oral dosing, commercial instructions were followed to add
solubilized vorinostat (100 mg/kg) to Medigel (purchased from ClearH20, Westbrook, ME, USA).

[PAGE 12] X. laevis Tissue Processing

After stage 46 tadpoles were euthanized with 20x Tricaine, tadpoles were washed three
times with PBS (-/-) and fixed in 4% Paraformaldehyde in PBS + Mg + EGTA (MEMFA) (Alfa
Aesar, Tewksbury, MA, USA) for 2 hours at RT. For sections, Xenopus tadpoles were
cryoprotected by sequential incubation of 10%, 20% and 30% sucrose in 1x PBS(-/-), only
transferring to the subsequent concentration when the samples sunk to the bottom of the
scintillation vial. Cryoprotected tadpoles were embedded in 5% agarose and were stored in
80°C. For Gl staining, the gastrointestinal tract was microdissected with a stereoscope before
embedding. Embedding tissue were sectioned coronally at 20 µm thickness on a Cryostat
(Leica, CM3050 S, Wetzlar, Germany) and mounted on superfrost plus slides (Thermo Fisher,
Waltham, MA, USA). Slides were dehydrated for 30 minutes at 20°C, before storing at -80°C.
For whole mount preparation, tadpoles were processed in a method previously published
(Willsey, 2021).

[PAGE 13] In situ hybridization

Following X. laevis tissue processing of cryosections, sample pretreatment, RNAscope
Target Retrieval and the RNAscope Assay was conducted by the HMS Neurobiology Imaging
Facility following manufacturer's instructions. XI.MeCP2 was custom designed by Advanced Cell
Diagnostics. Rpl8 was used as a positive control (XI-LOC108706872-C3, Cat No. 516501-C3,
Advanced Cell Diagnostics, Hayward, CA) and DapB as a negative control (Cat No. 320758,
Advanced Cell Diagnostics, Hayward, CA).

[PAGE 13] Immunohistochemistry of Xenopus laevis sections and whole mounts

Following tissue processing, cryosections were blocked for 2 hours at room temperature
and subsequently incubated with primary antibodies overnight at 4°C, including mouse anti-
alpha acetylated tubulin (1:1000 dilution, Sigma Aldrich, Burlington, MA USA), mouse anti-beta-
tubulin (1:1000 dilution, E7, Developmental Studies Hybridoma Bank, Iowa City, Iowa, USA),
anti-MeCP2 (1:1000 dilution, Invitrogen, Waltham, MA USA), Hoechst (1:1000 dilution,

293 Aesar, Tewksbury, MA, USA) for 2 hours at RT. For sections, Xenopus tadpoles were
294 cryoprotected by sequential incubation of 10%, 20% and 30% sucrose in 1x PBS(-/-), only
295 transferring to the subsequent concentration when the samples sunk to the bottom of the
296 scintillation vial. Cryoprotected tadpoles were embedded in 5% agarose and were stored in
297 80°C. For Gl staining, the gastrointestinal tract was microdissected with a stereoscope before
298 embedding. Embedding tissue were sectioned coronally at 20 µm thickness on a Cryostat
299 (Leica, CM3050 S, Wetzlar, Germany) and mounted on superfrost plus slides (Thermo Fisher,
300 Waltham, MA, USA). Slides were dehydrated for 30 minutes at 20°C, before storing at -80°C.
301 For whole mount preparation, tadpoles were processed in a method previously published
302 (Willsey, 2021).

[PAGE 13] In situ hybridization
303 Following X. laevis tissue processing of cryosections, sample pretreatment, RNAscope
304 Target Retrieval and the RNAscope Assay was conducted by the HMS Neurobiology Imaging
305 Facility following manufacturer's instructions. XI.MeCP2 was custom designed by Advanced Cell
306 Diagnostics. Rpl8 was used as a positive control (XI-LOC108706872-C3, Cat No. 516501-C3,
307 Advanced Cell Diagnostics, Hayward, CA) and DapB as a negative control (Cat No. 320758,
308 Advanced Cell Diagnostics, Hayward, CA).

[PAGE 13] Immunohistochemistry of Xenopus laevis sections and whole mounts
309 Following tissue processing, cryosections were blocked for 2 hours at room temperature
310 and subsequently incubated with primary antibodies overnight at 4°C, including mouse anti-
311 alpha acetylated tubulin (1:1000 dilution, Sigma Aldrich, Burlington, MA USA), mouse anti-beta-
312 tubulin (1:1000 dilution, E7, Developmental Studies Hybridoma Bank, Iowa City, Iowa, USA),
313 anti-MeCP2 (1:1000 dilution, Invitrogen, Waltham, MA USA), Hoechst (1:1000 dilution,
314 ThermoFisher, Waltham, MA, USA), negative controls anti-mouse IgG (1:1000 dilution,
315 Invitrogen, Waltham, MA, USA), and anti-rabbit (1:1000 dilution, Invitrogen, Waltham, ΜΑ USA),
316 as well as FITC-conjugated isolectin B4 (1:1000 dilution, Thermo Fisher, Waltham, MA, USA).
317 Slides were washed twice with TRIS-buffered saline, with 1% Tween-20 (TBT) for 5 minutes
318 each and incubated in the dark with their corresponding secondary antibody: Goat anti-rabbit
319 Alexa 647 (1:1000 dilution, Abcam, Waltham, MA, USA) and Goat anti-mouse Alexa 594
320 (1:1000 dilution, Abcam, Waltham, MA, USA) for 1 hour at room temperature. Slides were
321 washed three times with TBT for 5 minutes each on an orbital shaker and mounted in ProLong
322 Gold Antifade Mountant (ThermoFisher, Waltham, MA, USA) with a #1 coverslip and sealed.
323 Slides were stored in the dark at 4°C before image acquisition. Z-stacks were acquired at 1µm
324 to visualize brain and gastrointestinal sections.
325 X. laevis embryos were processed for whole mount immunofluorescence as described
326 (Willsey, 2021). Fixed tadpoles were quenched for 1 hour in a lightbox in 5% formamide and 4%
327 hydrogen peroxide in PBS, permeabilized for 1 hour in PBS with 0.1% Triton X-100 (PBT) and
328 blocked for 1 hour in 10% CAS-Block in PBT (Life Technologies, Carlsbad, CA, USA). Primary
329 antibodies were incubated overnight at 4°C, including mouse anti-alpha acetylated tubulin
330 (1:700 dilution Sigma Aldrich, Burlington, MA USA), mouse anti-beta-tubulin (1:100 dilution, E7,
331 Developmental Studies Hybridoma Bank, Iowa City, Iowa, USA)), Hoechst (1:100 dilution,
332 ThermoFisher, Waltham, MA, USA) and anti-mouse IgG (1:100 dilution). Slides were washed in
333 PBT, blocked in 10% CAS-Block for 30 minutes, and incubated with the corresponding
334 secondary antibody for 2 hours at room temperature including Goat anti-mouse Alexa 546
335 (1:100 dilution, Thermo Fisher, Waltham, MA, USA) and Goat anti-rabbit 633 (1:100 dilution,
336 ThermoFisher, Waltham, MA, USA). Tadpoles are washed with PBT for 1 hour and then
337 washed in PBS for another hour before mounting in Vectashield (Vector Laboratories,
338 Burlingame, CA, USA). Z-stacks were acquired at 1µm for visualizing epidermal MCC's and
339 3μm for visualizing entire brain regions.

[PAGE 15] Drug target discovery in X. laevis using thermal proteome profiling
[PAGE 15] Sample preparation
340 While we largely followed the protein integral solubility alteration (PISA) thermal
341 proteome profiling protocol (Gaetani et al., 2019), we adapted the mammalian cell- and tissue-
342 specific parameters to tadpoles by optimizing the method to tadpoles by reducing thermal
343 treatment temperatures to account for the lower normal temperature range of X. laevis.
344 Unmodified X. laevis tadpoles (stage 47-50) were exposed to 25 µM vorinostat or 0.1 μΜ
345 ivermectin for 2 h while freely swimming in 0.1x MMR medium. Following euthanasia using
346 Tricaine, animals were washed with fresh MMR, cut into thirds (head, abdomen containing all
347 visceral organs, and tail), and placed into individual Eppendorf tubes covered with MMR
348 containing the same drug and concentration and incubated for 3 min at one of 9 temperatures
349 spanning 30-60°C. 30°C was selected as the control temperature, where no appreciable thermal
350 denaturation should take place, based on the maximum tolerable temperature for X. laevis
351 (Ruthsatz et al., 2018). Following aspiration of remaining liquid, samples were flash frozen in
352 liquid nitrogen.
353 Samples were further processed and analyzed by Phenoswitch Bioscence, Inc.
354 (Sherbrooke, Québec, Canada). Thermally-treated samples were lysed in 100 µL PBS with
355 0.4% NP-40 with 4 cycles of freeze/thaw. Insoluble material was cleared by centrifugation (10
356 min, 10,000 G, 4°C). 11µL of supernatant for each of the 9 temperatures were then pooled in
357 one tube and samples were centrifuged again at 13,000 RPM for 75 minutes, at 4°C to pellet
358 precipitated proteins. 80 µL of the supernatant were reduced with 10 mM DTT for 15 min at
359 65°C and alkylated with 15 mM IAA and 30 min at room temperature in the dark. Proteins were
360 precipitated with 8 volumes of ice-cold acetone and 1 volume of ice cold methanol overnight.
361 Protein pellets were washed 3 times with 250 µl of ice-cold methanol and resuspended in 100
362 µL digestion buffer. Digestion was carried for 4 hours in 50 mM Tris ph 8 + 0.75 mM Urea + 1µg
363 trypsin/LysC at 37°C with agitation. Another 1 µg of trypsin/LysC was added, and digestion was
364 continued overnight. Peptides were purified by reversed phase SPE and analyzed by LC-
365 MS/MS.

[PAGE 16] Mass spectrometry
366 Acquisition was performed with a TripleTOF 6600 (Sciex, Foster City, CA, USA)
367 equipped with an electrospray interface with a 25 µm iD capillary and coupled to a Micro LC200
368 (Eksigent, Redwood City, CA, USA). Analyst TF 1.8 software was used to control the
369 instrument. Acquisition was performed in data independent acquisition (DIA or SWATH) using
370 gas phase fractionation (GPF1 from 350 m/z to 800 m/z and GPF2 from 800 m/z to 1250 m/z).
371 The source voltage was set to 5.5 kV and maintained at 325oC, curtain gas was set at 45 psi,
372 gas one at 25 psi and gas two at 25 psi. Separation was performed on a reversed phase
373 Kinetex XB column 0.3 µm i.d., 2.6 µm particles, 150mm long (Phenomenex) which was
374 maintained at 60°C. Samples were injected by loop overfilling into a 5 µL loop. For the 60
375 minutes LC gradient, the mobile phase consisted of the following solvent A (0.2% v/v formic acid
376 and 3% DMSO v/v in water) and solvent B (0.2% v/v formic acid and 3% DMSO in EtOH) at a
377 flow rate of 3 µL/min. Both GPF files were analyzed on a previously-generated 3D ion library
378 using the SWATH 2.0 microapp from Peakview (Sciex, Foster City, CA, USA). Each GPF file
379 was analyzed using 10 peptides per protein, 4 MS/MS transition per peptide, 12.5 min RT
380 window and 25 ppm XIC width. The reported quantification for a protein is the sum of all the
381 correctly integrated peptides (FDR<0.05) in both GPF files.

[PAGE 16] Mouse care
382 Experiments were performed with MeCP2-null (MeCP2-) (strain 003890) and age-
383 matched WT male littermates (MeCP2+/Y), purchased from Jackson Laboratories (Bar Harbor,
384 ME). All mice were housed in ventilated racks under specific-pathogen-free conditions at a room
385 temperature in a 12/12 h light/dark cycle with food and water ad libitum. All animal experiments
386 and procedures were reviewed and approved by the Harvard Medical School (HMS) Institutional
387 Animal Care and Use Committee regulations. Every effort was made to minimize their suffering.
388 Mice were assessed for disease severity and endpoint criteria on a daily basis by weighing and
389 using the phenotypic scoring method developed by the Bird laboratory (Guy et al., 2007;
390 Szczesna et al., 2014), which includes assessing mobility, gait, breathing, tremor, and general
391 condition. Endpoint was determined by 20% body mass loss or a score of 2 in criteria D, E, or
392 F. Dosing and Behavioral procedures began when mice reached 4 weeks of age.

[PAGE 17] Behavioral Testing
[PAGE 17] Elevated Plus Maze (EPM)
393 The elevated plus maze (EPM) consisted of two open and two closed (34 cm long and 5
394 cm wide) arms extended out from a central platform 50 cm above the floor. The test was carried
395 out in dim ambient lighting. The room of the experiment and its spatial cues were kept
396 consistent and minimal. Mice were habituated in the test room for 30 minutes before the start of
397 the test. Mice were placed near the center compartment of the maze, facing an open arm, and
398 allowed to explore the apparatus for 5 minutes. After each test, the maze was cleaned
399 thoroughly with 70% ethanol and left to dry before the start of the next test. A computer-assisted
400 video-tracking system (EthoVision XT 14, Noldus, Leesburg, VA) was used to record the
401 number of open and closed arm entries as well as the total time spent in open, closed, and
402 center compartments. An increase in the percent time spent or entries into the open arms was
403 used as a surrogate measure of anxiolytic-like behavior (Carobrez and Bertoglio, 2005).

[PAGE 17] Experiments
Experiments were performed with MeCP2-null (MeCP2-) (strain 003890) and age-matched WT male littermates (MeCP2+/Y), purchased from Jackson Laboratories (Bar Harbor, ME). All mice were housed in ventilated racks under specific-pathogen-free conditions at a room temperature in a 12/12 h light/dark cycle with food and water ad libitum. All animal experiments and procedures were reviewed and approved by the Harvard Medical School (HMS) Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee regulations. Every effort was made to minimize their suffering.
Mice were assessed for disease severity and endpoint criteria on a daily basis by weighing and using the phenotypic scoring method developed by the Bird laboratory (Guy et al., 2007; Szczesna et al., 2014), which includes assessing mobility, gait, breathing, tremor, and general condition. Endpoint was determined by 20% body mass loss or a score of 2 in criteria D, E, or F. Dosing and Behavioral procedures began when mice reached 4 weeks of age.

[PAGE 17] Behavioral Testing
Elevated Plus Maze (EPM)
The elevated plus maze (EPM) consisted of two open and two closed (34 cm long and 5 cm wide) arms extended out from a central platform 50 cm above the floor. The test was carried out in dim ambient lighting. The room of the experiment and its spatial cues were kept consistent and minimal. Mice were habituated in the test room for 30 minutes before the start of the test. Mice were placed near the center compartment of the maze, facing an open arm, and allowed to explore the apparatus for 5 minutes. After each test, the maze was cleaned thoroughly with 70% ethanol and left to dry before the start of the next test. A computer-assisted video-tracking system (EthoVision XT 14, Noldus, Leesburg, VA) was used to record the number of open and closed arm entries as well as the total time spent in open, closed, and center compartments. An increase in the percent time spent or entries into the open arms was used as a surrogate measure of anxiolytic-like behavior (Carobrez and Bertoglio, 2005).

[PAGE 18] Spatial Novelty Y-Maze (Y-maze)
The spatial novelty y-maze consisted of a Y-shaped maze with three arms at a 120° from each other as well as a removable blockade used to prevent access to one of the arms during the Habituation phase. The test was carried out in dim ambient lighting. The room of the experiment and its spatial cues were kept consistent. One of the three arms was defined as the start arm, where the mice would be placed at the start of the experiment and was kept consistent throughout the entire study. The test consisted of a three-minute Habituation phase where one of the two non-start arms was blocked off, a two-minute intertrial interval (ITI) outside of the maze and a three-minute Test phase, where the previously blocked arm was exposed to the mouse. The arm that was blocked off during the Habituation phase was randomized and noted for each mouse.
Mice were kept in an adjacent room to not disturb the test. The test mouse was placed in a holding cage and brought to the test room with the maze and immediately placed into the Y-maze at the designated start arm and allowed to explore the start and familiar arm trial for three minutes. At the end of the habituation phase, the mouse was placed into the holding cage for 2 minutes ITI. During this time, the blockade was removed, and the maze was cleaned with an ammonia-based cleaner with a paper towel and left to dry to remove odor cues. The mice were then placed back in the start arm and left to explore the entire maze for three minutes. After the test trial, the mouse was transported back to its home cages and the maze was again wiped dry with an ammonia based cleaner. A computer-assisted video tracking system (EthoVision XT 14, Noldus, Leesburg, VA) was used to record the number of entries, time spent in each arm and as distance traveled in each arm during the Habituation and Test Phase. The percentage of time and distance spent in the novel, or previously blocked arm were used to assess spatial novelty seeking behavior (Dellu et al., 2000).

[PAGE 19] Mouse Histology and Immunostaining
Mice were euthanized with CO2 inhalation, transcardially perfused with PBS (-/-) and 4% PFA, and tissues of interest were removed. Regions of the gastrointestinal tract and lung processed as was described previously(Morton and Snider, 2017; Nalle et al., 2019; Tsai et al., 2017). Paraffin blocks were sectioned into 15 μm thickness. Mouse lung tissues were sectioned coronally and Gl tissues were stained with hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) by the Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center's IHC Core Facility. The slides were also stained for rabbit anti-acetylated a-tubulin (ABclonal, ab179484, Woburn, MA, USA) mouse anti-CD-64 (R&D systems, AF3628, Minneapolis, MN, USA), chicken anti-ẞIII-tubulin (Biolegend, 801202, San Diego, CA, USA) immunofluorescence by Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center's IHC Core Facility.
Mouse brains were fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde at 4°C overnight, cryoprotected in a sucrose gradient (10%, 20% and 30%), and subsequently embedded in OCT Tissue Tek. The embedded tissues were subsequently sectioned coronally at 30µm and the free-floating sections were stained as previously described(Potts et al., 2020). The sections were blocked with 10% CAS Block in PBT for 1hr, stained with primary antibody (rabbit anti-iba-1, 1:1000, Wako, #019-19741; mouse anti-NeuN, 1:1000, Abcam, #ab104224; Hoechst, 1:1000, Thermo Fisher, H1399) overnight at 4°C. After three 10-minute washes in PBS (-/-) on an orbital shaker, the sections were stained in secondary antibody (anti-rabbit Alexa 647 for iba1, anti-mouse Alexa 594 for NeuN) for 1 hour at room temperature. After three 10-minute washes on an orbital shaker, the sections were mounted on superfrost plus slides (ThermoFisher, Waltham, MA, USA) in ProLong Gold Antifade Mountant (ThermoFisher, Waltham, MA, USA) with a #1 coverslip and sealed. Z-stack images were acquired at 1µm intervals using the 63x/ glycerol.

[PAGE 20] Multiplex Chemokine Assay
After mouse euthanization, blood was collected by cardiac puncture using at 23G needle in ethylendiamine tetra-acetic acid (EDTA) treated tubes (Microvette 200 K3EDTA, CAT# 20.1288.100, Sarstedt, Numbrecht, Germany). To avoid hemolysis, the tubes were kept at room temperature and quickly processed for plasma. Tubes were centrifuged at 2000 x g for 10 minutes and the plasma was separated and stored in -80C until assayed. Chemokine levels were measured in mouse plasma using the Bio-Plex Pro Mouse Chemokine Panel 31-Plex (Cat# 12009159, Bio Rad, Hercules, CA, USA). Measurements were performed using the Bio-Plex 3D Suspension Array System (BioRad, Hercules, CA, USA), following the manufacturer's instructions.

[PAGE 20] Microscopy and Image Processing
H&E slides were imaged with 4x and 20x objectives with the Biotek Cytation 5.
Immunofluorescent Xenopus whole mounts and Xenopus and mouse stained sections were imaged with the Leica SP5 X MP Inverted Confocal Microscope using 25x (NA 0.95) water objective and 63x (NA 1.3) Glycerol objectives. Sections were imaged in white light and diode laser scanning mode and whole mounts were imaged using multiphoton pulsed IR laser scanning. Serial scanning was used during acquisition to avoid bleed-through. Image settings were kept constant between groups, in terms of laser power, bit-depth, z-stack interval, resolution (pixels), aperture settings, and gain/offset. Images were post-processed and analyzed using ImageJ (Fiji, NIH).
MCC morphological analysis
2-photon images of X. laevis 25x and 63x MCC's were maximum projected, background subtracted, and subsequently assessed for cilia orientation and cilia length, as previously described (Chien et al., 2018).

[PAGE 21] MCC Functional Assay
We visualized the cilia-driven flow of fluorescent microspheres over the surface of the xenopus tadpole by taking times series with the Leica SP5 x MP inverted confocal. Our methods were based on previous reports (Kulkarni et al., 2018) with some modifications. Stage 45 tadpoles were placed in a 24 well µ-Plate 14mm (ibidi, Gräfelfing, Germany), and underwent anesthesia by incubation with 1x tricaine before proceeding to image. One tadpole was placed per well for individual tracking. Fluorescent microspheres beads (Thermo Fisher, Waltham, MA) were added at a final dilution of 1:100. We chose the bead size of 3µm, because during preliminary testing and as is reflected in the data, WT X. laevis tadpoles consistently was able to clear beads that were 3µm diameter at this concentration. The Leica SP5 x MP laser scanning mode was used to visualize the fluorescent microspheres beads at an excitation of 520nm and emission of 560nm with the following settings: 512x512 pixels, bidirectional scanning mode, and at a scan speed of 800-1600Hz, with the 25x (NA 0.95) water objective, and over the time course of 5 minutes every 5s. Time series were acquired of in the olfactory and lateral region of the epidermis.

[PAGE 21] Quantification of bead displacement
The time series stacks were maximum intensity projected to visualize the overall bead flow. Intensity was measured as a function from the distance from the surface of the epidermis.

[PAGE 21] Mean Intensity Quantitation
To generate a ROI mask, channels acquired in one z-stack were split and the maximum intensity projection of a 'control' channel was taken. In the case for assessing aaT expression mouse Gl tract and bronchiole, the ẞIII-tubulin channel was used, and for assessing MeCP2 expression, the a -acetylated tubulin channel was used in the image stack. Subsequently, background noise was subtracted, and auto-thresholded, whose settings were held constant

[PAGE 21] MCC Functional Assay
We visualized the cilia-driven flow of fluorescent microspheres over the surface of the xenopus
tadpole by taking times series with the Leica SP5 x MP inverted confocal. Our methods were
based on previous reports (Kulkarni et al., 2018) with some modifications. Stage 45 tadpoles
were placed in a 24 well µ-Plate 14mm (ibidi, Gräfelfing, Germany), and underwent anesthesia
by incubation with 1x tricaine before proceeding to image. One tadpole was placed per well for
individual tracking. Fluorescent microspheres beads (Thermo Fisher, Waltham, MA) were added
at a final dilution of 1:100. We chose the bead size of 3µm, because during preliminary testing
and as is reflected in the data, WT X. laevis tadpoles consistently was able to clear beads that
were 3µm diameter at this concentration. The Leica SP5 x MP laser scanning mode was used
to visualize the fluorescent microspheres beads at an excitation of 520nm and emission of
560nm with the following settings: 512x512 pixels, bidirectional scanning mode, and at a scan
speed of 800-1600Hz, with the 25x (NA 0.95) water objective, and over the time course of 5
minutes every 5s. Time series were acquired of in the olfactory and lateral region of the
epidermis.

[PAGE 21] Quantification of bead displacement
The time series stacks were maximum intensity projected to visualize the overall bead flow.
Intensity was measured as a function from the distance from the surface of the epidermis.

[PAGE 21] Mean Intensity Quantitation
To generate a ROI mask, channels acquired in one z-stack were split and the maximum
intensity projection of a 'control' channel was taken. In the case for assessing aaT expression
mouse Gl tract and bronchiole, the ẞIII-tubulin channel was used, and for assessing MeCP2
expression, the a -acetylated tubulin channel was used in the image stack. Subsequently,
background noise was subtracted, and auto-thresholded, whose settings were held constant
between groups. The ROIs generated from the control channel were used to quantify the
maximum projected channel of interest, to obtain the mean intensity (integrated density per
area). A minimum of 3 serial sections were analyzed per animal.

[PAGE 21] Counting Ib4+ cells
Confocal Z-stacks of X. laevis GI tract images were quantified for IB4+ cells, by taking the
maximum intensity projection of the ib4+ channel. Following noise reduction, and auto-
threshold, ib4+ cells were segmented and counted using the particle analysis function in the
ImageJ software (NIH, Bethesda, MD).

[PAGE 22] Sholl Analysis
Sholl analysis was performed as previously published47. Confocal (at 1um intervals) Z-stacks
were maximum intensity projected in the iba-1 channel, noise de-speckled, subsequently
segmented using the auto-threshold function, and microglia were duplicated into 8-bit TIF files,
in the field of view, ensuring that for each mouse at least 10 microglia were selected in the
ipsilateral and contralateral region of the olfactory bulb. Using the Sholl analysis plugin in
ImageJ (NIH, Bethesda, MD), traces and intersections were generated.

[PAGE 22] Statistical analysis
Statistical analysis of biological results was performed using Graphpad Prism 9.3. For
comparison of two conditions, Student's t-test was used unless otherwise indicated. ANOVA
with pairwise t-tests and Bonferroni correction or the Holm-Šídák tests was used to evaluate
significance of multiple variables. P values <0.05 were considered significant (*, p < 0.05; ** p <
0.01; *** p < 0.001; **** p < 0.0001). Tadpole screens and mouse studies were conducted with
5-8 animals each and repeated, except for the mouse oral dosing study.

[PAGE 23] RESULTS

[PAGE 23] Modeling Rett syndrome genetic and phenotypic heterogeneity in Xenopus laevis
A major challenge to Rett therapeutics discovery lies in the inherent heterogeneity
observed in patients stemming from gene expression variability due to the gene regulatory
impact of distinct MeCP2 mutations, combined with tissue heterogeneity caused by mosaicism
resulting from X chromosome inactivation. As a result, Rett patients exhibit a spectrum of
disabilities. To establish an animal model of Rett that would incorporate the heterogeneity
observed in patients, we used CRISPR to generate a mosaic knockdown of MeCP2 protein in
Xenopus laevis tadpoles, which have been previously used to model neurodevelopmental
diseases due to their evolutionary proximity to mammals and well-characterized neural
development (Exner and Willsey, 2021; Pratt and Khakhalin, 2013).
Injection of X. laevis embryos at 4- or 8-cell stages using cas9 pre-complexed with
sgRNA targeting 6 sites of the MeCP2 gene, including the regions corresponding to the DNA-
binding domain, resulted in a tunable model of MeCP2 knockdown with a heterogeneous
phenotype when assessed at the population level. Based on our target selection and injection
strategy at the 4-cell stage, each individual animal was edited as a mosaic and presented
varying degree of severity, without apparent toxicity from Cas9 or sgRNA. Indeed, all embryos
developed to the swimming tadpole stages (Nieuwkoop-Faber stages 45-50) with no apparent
loss of viability or morphological defect in earlier stages.
Importantly, swimming tadpoles with MeCP2 knock down (“Rett” tadpoles) exhibited a
broad range of abnormal behavior compared to wild type vehicle-injected control tadpoles
("Control") including darting motions and rapid repetitive swimming in tight circles (Fig. 1a,b and
Supplementary Movie 1) reminiscent of the repetitive motions observed in human Rett patients
as well as C-shaped or straight rigor (Supplementary Movie 1) that has been shown to
correspond to seizures in prior Xenopus studies (Hewapathirane et al., 2008). The cas9 protein
and sgRNA doses were titered to achieve between 5 and 95% gene editing efficiency as
determined by qPCR without resulting in toxicity (Supplementary Fig. 1a). All tadpoles
exhibited significant MeCP2 gene insertion/deletion polymorphisms (indels) at each of the
mecp2 gene target sites (Supplementary Fig. 1b) and reduced MeCP2 RNA expression (Fig.
1c). MeCP2 protein levels were also heterogeneously reduced in the brain (Fig. 1d,e) and
olfactory multiciliated cells (MCC) (Fig. 1d,f). This this editing approach resulted in an animal
model of Rett with intra-subject and inter-subject diversity at molecular and phenotypic scales,
which is similar to what is observed in humans.
In line with prior studies in humans and other model organisms (Sanfeliu et al., 2019, p.
2), when we analyzed the transcriptome-wide effects of MeCP2 knockdown on the Rett
phenotype in Xenopus, only subtle shifts in gene expression were detected with 70 out of
10,935 genes probed undergoing a significant change in gene expression (padjusted<0.05) (Fig.
1g, Supplementary Table 1). Of the 70 differentially expressed genes, 37 are involved in
metabolic processes, 9 operate within developmental processes, and 8 are part of signal
transduction pathways (Supplementary Fig. 2a); this aligns with changes in genes that control
metabolism or regulate neuronal processes (e.g., ion transport, nervous system development) in
Rett patients (Renthal et al., 2018).
Interestingly, analysis of gene co-expression networks identified substantial
reorganization from control animals (Fig. 1h) following MeCP2 knock down (Fig. 1i),
characterized by a loss of strong connectivity among genes involved in the regulation of MeCP2
(FMR1 and TRKB receptor NTRK2 (Abuhatzira et al., 2007; Arsenault et al., 2021)), neuronal
development (BDNF (Chang et al., 2006; Li and Pozzo-Miller, 2014)),, and circadian rhythm
(PER1, PER2 (Martínez de Paz et al., 2015)) all of which are altered in Rett patients (Li and
Pozzo-Miller, 2014; Miller et al., 2019). Notably, after MeCP2 knock down, BDNF strengthened
as a network hub and exhibited greater co-expression connectivity amongst gene nodes (Fig.
1i). This was unexpected because although BDNF is involved in neuronal development, synaptic
transmission, and plasticity, it declines with the onset of Rett-like neuropathological and
behavioral phenotypes (Li and Pozzo-Miller, 2014). However, BDNF is a known target of
repression by MeCP2 and our findings are consistent with prior work suggesting that
downregulation of BDNF is a later and indirect outcome of MeCP2 deficiency (Chang et al.,
2006; Li and Pozzo-Miller, 2014).
We then comprehensively compared the effects of MeCP2 knock down in Xenopus to
changes observed in published transcriptomic data sets from Rett patients as well as MeCP2
knockout mouse and zebrafish models (Supplementary Table 2). After performing
dimensionality reduction in this cross-species analysis, K-Means clustering applied to the
principal components revealed 3 clusters, with mouse and human clustering together and
zebrafish and Xenopus forming 2 independent clusters (Supplementary Fig. 2b). Importantly,
diverse gene-expression abnormalities that occur across cell types in Rett syndrome could
contribute to the differences observed across these datasets (Renthal et al., 2018). In this case,
both the human and mouse transcriptomics were performed on brain tissues, whereas the
zebrafish and Xenopus data are from whole organisms, which may account for the clustering
patterns observed.
Despite evidence of species-specific clustering, a common gene signature comprised of
96 genes was identified across all species by searching for genes with a fold change variance
greater than mean variance. However, the common genes within this transcriptomic signature
are expressed at similar low fold change levels in 7 of the 9 datasets analyzed, with slightly
greater variations in expression only observed in 1 out of 5 mouse datasets and 1 out of 3
human datasets (Fig. 1j). This finding provides additional evidence that mutation of MeCP2
produces widespread, yet subtle, perturbations in gene expression.

580
as a network hub and exhibited greater co-expression connectivity amongst gene nodes (Fig.
581
1i). This was unexpected because although BDNF is involved in neuronal development, synaptic
582
transmission, and plasticity, it declines with the onset of Rett-like neuropathological and
583
behavioral phenotypes (Li and Pozzo-Miller, 2014). However, BDNF is a known target of
584
repression by MeCP2 and our findings are consistent with prior work suggesting that
585
downregulation of BDNF is a later and indirect outcome of MeCP2 deficiency (Chang et al.,
586
2006; Li and Pozzo-Miller, 2014).
587

588
We then comprehensively compared the effects of MeCP2 knock down in Xenopus to
589
changes observed in published transcriptomic data sets from Rett patients as well as MeCP2
590
knockout mouse and zebrafish models (Supplementary Table 2). After performing
591
dimensionality reduction in this cross-species analysis, K-Means clustering applied to the
592
principal components revealed 3 clusters, with mouse and human clustering together and
593
zebrafish and Xenopus forming 2 independent clusters (Supplementary Fig. 2b). Importantly,
594
diverse gene-expression abnormalities that occur across cell types in Rett syndrome could
595
contribute to the differences observed across these datasets (Renthal et al., 2018). In this case,
596
both the human and mouse transcriptomics were performed on brain tissues, whereas the
597
zebrafish and Xenopus data are from whole organisms, which may account for the clustering
598
patterns observed.
599

600
Despite evidence of species-specific clustering, a common gene signature comprised of
601
96 genes was identified across all species by searching for genes with a fold change variance
602
greater than mean variance. However, the common genes within this transcriptomic signature
603
are expressed at similar low fold change levels in 7 of the 9 datasets analyzed, with slightly
604
greater variations in expression only observed in 1 out of 5 mouse datasets and 1 out of 3
605
human datasets (Fig. 1j). This finding provides additional evidence that mutation of MeCP2
606
produces widespread, yet subtle, perturbations in gene expression.

607
Using gene co-expression network analysis (Huynh-Thu et al., 2010), we also identified
608
interconnected gene sub-networks that are conserved across species and tissues in the MeCP2
609
deficient condition (Fig. 1k, Supplementary Tables 3 and 4). Comparison across all species
610
identified several shared major gene targets and regulators despite differences in species-
611
specific network structure (Supplementary Fig. 2c). Interestingly, WNT8B, which is known to
612
be modulated by the Rett-implicated gene Foxg1 (Aguiar et al., 2014), was found to be the most
613
interconnected gene target within the MeCP2 cross-species network. The strongest gene
614
regulators in this network, NR4A3 and SOD2, are both involved in oxidative metabolism, which
615
is also known to be dysregulated in Rett Syndrome (De Felice et al., 2012). Thus, this CRISPR-
616
enabled Xenopus model of Rett replicates many genetic and phenotypic features of the disease
617
seen in humans.

[PAGE 28] Figure 1: MeCP2 knockdown using CRISPR in Xenopus laevis tadpoles models Rett
618
syndrome. a-b, Tadpole models of Rett syndrome exhibit distinct swimming behavior in 60 mm
619
diameter dishes following MeCP2 knockdown (“Rett”) compared to mock-injected controls
620
("Control”). MeCP2 RNA expression in brain and gastrointestinal (GI) tract using RNAscope, c,
621
and protein in brain and multi-ciliated olfactory cells using immunohistochemistry, d-f, are
622
significantly reduced in Rett syndrome tadpole models while maintaining a large degree of
623
heterogeneity spatially, d, and across tissues, e-f; scale bars, 100 µm in brain, 20 µm in
624
olfactory multi-ciliated cells. g, Volcano plot of differentially expressed genes showing that only
625
70 genes are significantly up- or down-regulated following MeCP2 knockdown (p < 0.05, fold
626
change >2, t-test with Bonferroni correction, N = 3). Gene regulatory networks for control, h, and
627
Rett, i, tadpoles reveal large network rearrangements with an increase in BDNF centrality. j,
628
Comparison against other Rett syndrome models and clinical samples indicates minimal
629
differential gene expression across the 96-gene signature developed to classify Rett syndrome.
630
k, Network-level comparison across species and tissues (left) and identified shared target
631
(middle) and regulator (right) genes.

[PAGE 28] Computational discovery of drugs that reverse the network-level impact of Rett
632
syndrome.
633

634
In Rett, MeCP2 knockout results in widespread but subtle gene expression patterns, and
635
most effects are not detectable using standard statistical analysis. Researchers have applied
636
network-based analytical methods to uncover previously-hidden connections within RNA and
637
protein interaction networks (Miller et al., 2019; Sanfeliu et al., 2019; Varderidou-Minasian et al.,
638
2020), but these approaches have not been applied to Rett syndrome therapeutics discovery.
639
To leverage transcriptomics analysis for drug discovery, we developed a computational
640
framework we termed nemoCAD (network model for causality-aware discovery)(Fig. 2a) that
641
compares transcriptomic signatures of disease versus healthy control subjects to predict
642
compounds from the Library of Integrated Network-Based Cellular Signatures (LINCS) database
643
(“NIH LINCS Program,” n.d.), including FDA-approved drugs, which have a high likelihood to
644
reverse the disease signature state back to a healthy state. Though signature-based tools have
645
been previously developed to enable drug discovery (e.g., CMAP (Lamb et al., 2006), NicheNet
646
(Browaeys et al., 2020), GPSnet (Cheng et al., 2019)), a major drawback is the impact of the
647
expression of any single gene or protein on the resulting prediction. To be used effectively,
648
these tools require well-matched disease datasets to the human cell line-based datasets
649
present in LINCS, which may not be feasible for many diseases.
650

651
In contrast, we pursued an entirely different approach to transcriptomics signature
652
analysis that is based on a Bayesian network encoding directed gene-gene and drug-gene
653
interactions. By leveraging data in LINCS containing transcriptomics results following single
654
gene knockout/knockdown and overexpression as well as addition of drug perturbagens in
655
human cells, we calculated the probabilities of pairwise interactions among all of the genes and
656
drugs in a human gene-gene and drug-gene interaction network whose structure was extracted
657
from Comparative Toxicogenomics Database (CTD) ("The Comparative Toxicogenomics
658
Database | CTD,” n.d.), KEGG (Kanehisa and Goto, 2000), and TRRUST (Han et al., 2018).
659
Unlike signature based computational tools that take gene expression signatures at face value,
660
this probabilistic approach offers greater abstraction while prioritizing for the network impact of
661
perturbations, including those caused by disease or addition of drugs, and thereby reduces the
662
impact of tissue-specific or species-specific transcriptomic biases as well as the influence of the
663
expression of any individual gene.
664

665
To identify drugs that might reverse disease states, we generated probabilistic network
666
maps for each drug in the aggregate 19,800+ compound dataset. By inputting and comparing
gene microarray data from MeCP2 knockdown tadpoles versus vehicle-injected controls, we
identified sets of differentially expressed genes contained within the gene-gene interaction

642 compounds from the Library of Integrated Network-Based Cellular Signatures (LINCS) database
(“NIH LINCS Program,” n.d.), including FDA-approved drugs, which have a high likelihood to
reverse the disease signature state back to a healthy state. Though signature-based tools have
been previously developed to enable drug discovery (e.g., CMAP (Lamb et al., 2006), NicheNet
(Browaeys et al., 2020), GPSnet (Cheng et al., 2019)), a major drawback is the impact of the
expression of any single gene or protein on the resulting prediction. To be used effectively,
these tools require well-matched disease datasets to the human cell line-based datasets
present in LINCS, which may not be feasible for many diseases.

In contrast, we pursued an entirely different approach to transcriptomics signature
analysis that is based on a Bayesian network encoding directed gene-gene and drug-gene
interactions. By leveraging data in LINCS containing transcriptomics results following single
gene knockout/knockdown and overexpression as well as addition of drug perturbagens in
human cells, we calculated the probabilities of pairwise interactions among all of the genes and
drugs in a human gene-gene and drug-gene interaction network whose structure was extracted
from Comparative Toxicogenomics Database (CTD) ("The Comparative Toxicogenomics
Database | CTD,” n.d.), KEGG (Kanehisa and Goto, 2000), and TRRUST (Han et al., 2018).
Unlike signature based computational tools that take gene expression signatures at face value,
this probabilistic approach offers greater abstraction while prioritizing for the network impact of
perturbations, including those caused by disease or addition of drugs, and thereby reduces the
impact of tissue-specific or species-specific transcriptomic biases as well as the influence of the
expression of any individual gene.
To identify drugs that might reverse disease states, we generated probabilistic network
maps for each drug in the aggregate 19,800+ compound dataset. By inputting and comparing
gene microarray data from MeCP2 knockdown tadpoles versus vehicle-injected controls, we
identified sets of differentially expressed genes contained within the gene-gene interaction
network with a p-value < 0.05 and a log2 fold change between 0.7 and 3.1 in 0.3-fold-change
increments. For each fold-change, we generated a ranked list of compounds predicted to induce
reversal of transcriptome-wide changes of: 1) single gene states using a cross-correlation score,
2) single gene states using a cross-entropy score, and 3) an overall gene network state score
corresponding to the probability of involvement of the drug nodes in the identified subnetwork.
These drug lists were combined to identify drugs that were ranked by being most consistently
predicted to reverse the Rett transcriptome-wide changes and robust across the computational
settings (Supplementary Table 5). Drugs were manually down-selected based on available
toxicity data and to prioritize chemical diversity for initial screening. Rett tadpoles or controls
were then dosed with lead compounds for 7 days via the culture medium beginning 1-2 days
after the onset of symptoms and after collecting baseline swimming behavior data. Animal
behaviors (swimming pattern abnormalities and seizure stages) were recorded every other day
during drug exposure and washout phases, and the severity of seizure-like events was used as
a screening metric.
These studies revealed that the FDA-approved drugs, vorinostat and ivermectin,
demonstrated time-dependent reductions in seizure score that reversed after the drugs were
washed out (Fig. 2b; Supplementary Fig. 3). However, we focused on vorinostat rather than
ivermectin in all subsequent studies due to its higher predicted scoring consistency over time,
more favorable reported pharmacokinetics, and its ability, albeit limited, to cross the blood-brain
barrier. As a positive control with which to gauge relative efficacy, we also evaluated trofinetide,
the synthetic IGF-1 C-terminal tripeptide. Although only moderately effective in recent Phase III
Rett syndrome clinical trial top-line results that aligned with Phase II trial outcomes (Glaze et al.,
2017), trofinetide represents the most relevant clinical-stage benchmark treatment. Importantly,
in our Rett tadpole models, both trofinetide and vorinostat reduced seizure-like phenotypes and
also increased viability (Fig. 2b). At day 6 of treatment, there was a statistically significant effect
by both drugs on reducing swimming score relative to baseline before treatment onset (Fig. 2c).
As expected, no significant change was seen in WT and Rett vehicle-treated animals. This
head-to-head comparison has supported the possibility that our Xenopus population-level model
of Rett can offer predictive value for drug development.

[PAGE 32] Figure 2: Network-based computational prediction of effective drugs to treat Rett
syndrome in tadpole models. 
resulting gene-gene interaction subnetwork by interrogating the underlying subnetwork structure
to find control nodes and other network metrics. Additionally, the chemical structures of the
predicted drugs can be clustered by structural similarity based on SMILES notation and
annotated protein targets and pathways from DrugBank data. b, Graph showing relative effects
on seizure score over 10 days of treatment in MeCP2 KD tadpoles of vehicle and 25 μΜ
vorinostat (Rett - Vor) versus 70 µg/mL trofinetide (Rett - Tro), a clinical-stage drug with
demonstrated efficacy (tadpoles per condition and timepoint: N = 12 Rett - Vor and Vehicle, N =
8 Rett - Tro; error bars indicate s.d.; ANOVA P = 0.028 Vehicle-treated MeCP2 KD tadpoles did
not survive past day 3 of the treatment period in one study and past day 6 in a second study. c,
Change in swimming score at day 6 of treatment vs. baseline (day 0) is significantly improved
by both drugs. *, P < 0.05.

To understand the protein targets of both drugs, we adapted thermal proteome profiling
(Franken et al., 2015; Huber et al., 2015; Mateus et al., 2017) that identifies molecules that
drugs bind directly to protein targets for use with a whole exothermic animal (Xenopus tadpole)
as well as using isolated body segments (head, viscera, tail). While we were able to detect
some of the known histone deacetylase (HDAC) targets of vorinostat, we also found that both
this drug and ivermectin bind to multiple other proteins related more broadly to acetylation
metabolism, beyond histones and HDACs (Supplementary Table 6). These findings suggest a
potential mechanism of action for the Rett normalizing responses we observed that involves
restoration of normal acetyl-CoA metabolism and post-translational acetylation.
As these observations initially aligned with results of prior studies of HDAC6 acetylation
of tubulin in cells of Rett patients (Gold et al., 2015; Lebrun et al., 2021) and microtubule
modulation in closely-related CDKL5 deficiency disorder (Barbiero et al., 2019), we analyzed

709
resulting gene-gene interaction subnetwork by interrogating the underlying subnetwork structure
710
711
to find control nodes and other network metrics. Additionally, the chemical structures of the
predicted drugs can be clustered by structural similarity based on SMILES notation and
712 annotated protein targets and pathways from DrugBank data. b, Graph showing relative effects
713
714
715
on seizure score over 10 days of treatment in MeCP2 KD tadpoles of vehicle and 25 μΜ
vorinostat (Rett - Vor) versus 70 µg/mL trofinetide (Rett - Tro), a clinical-stage drug with
demonstrated efficacy (tadpoles per condition and timepoint: N = 12 Rett - Vor and Vehicle, N =
716
717
718
719
8 Rett - Tro; error bars indicate s.d.; ANOVA P = 0.028 Vehicle-treated MeCP2 KD tadpoles did
not survive past day 3 of the treatment period in one study and past day 6 in a second study. c,
Change in swimming score at day 6 of treatment vs. baseline (day 0) is significantly improved
by both drugs. *, P < 0.05.
720
721
722
723
724
725
726
727
728
729
730
To understand the protein targets of both drugs, we adapted thermal proteome profiling
(Franken et al., 2015; Huber et al., 2015; Mateus et al., 2017) that identifies molecules that
drugs bind directly to protein targets for use with a whole exothermic animal (Xenopus tadpole)
as well as using isolated body segments (head, viscera, tail). While we were able to detect
some of the known histone deacetylase (HDAC) targets of vorinostat, we also found that both
this drug and ivermectin bind to multiple other proteins related more broadly to acetylation
metabolism, beyond histones and HDACs (Supplementary Table 6). These findings suggest a
potential mechanism of action for the Rett normalizing responses we observed that involves
restoration of normal acetyl-CoA metabolism and post-translational acetylation.
731
732
733
As these observations initially aligned with results of prior studies of HDAC6 acetylation
of tubulin in cells of Rett patients (Gold et al., 2015; Lebrun et al., 2021) and microtubule
modulation in closely-related CDKL5 deficiency disorder (Barbiero et al., 2019), we analyzed
734
tadpole tissues for a-tubulin acetylation and observed surprising bidirectional shifts in
735
736
acetylation patterns depending on the tissue type. For example, a-tubulin was hypoacetylated in
neurons in sections of the midbrain (Supplementary Fig. 4a) and hindbrain (Fig. 3f) and
737
738
739
740
741
increased in GI tract (Fig. 3g) and olfactory multi-ciliated cells (Supplementary Fig. 4b) and
following MeCP2 knockdown, resulting in more sparse but dense tangles. Higher resolution
imaging revealed that the cilia were longer and misaligned on multiciliated cells compared to
controls (Fig. 3a), and both length (Fig. 3b) and orientation (Fig. 3c) were restored by
vorinostat treatment.
742
743
744
745
746
We then evaluated the impact of ciliary morphology and organization on ciliary function
using fluorescent microparticles (Supplemental Fig. 5). The disruption of ciliary beating-
induced flow on the surface of skin (Fig. 3d) and olfactory multiciliated cells (Fig. 3e) due to
MeCP2 knockdown is reversed by vorinostat treatment, suggesting that ciliary function
restoration is linked to ciliary function.
747
748
749
750
751
Due to the prevalence of Gl symptoms in Rett patients and our observation of tubulin
acetylation disruption and vorinostat-induced recovery in the Gl tract (Fig. 3g), we further
explored the role of MeCP2 knockdown in the gut. Staining for isolectin B4-positive (ib4+) cells
to assess Gl tract inflammation and nociceptive innervation, which is increased in Rett patients
(Baikie et al., 2014; Downs et al., 2010), revealed that tadpoles exhibited significant ib4+
752
expression due to MeCP2 knockdown (Fig. 3h,i), which vorinostat again reversed.
753
754

761
[PAGE 36] Figure 3: Vorinostat treatment of Rett tadpoles restores ciliary function, normalizes hypo-
762
and hyperacetylated tubulin across tissues, and reduces Gl tract inflammation. a,
763
764
765
766
767
768
769
770
771
Olfactory cell ciliary abnormalities due to MeCP2 knockdown were restored by treatment with
vorinostat (magenta-yellow colormap of fluorescence intensity, cilia stained for tubulin),
significantly restoring their b, length and c, orientation (****, P < 0.0001). Functional rescue of
cilia was also observed in both epithelial, d, and olfactory multiciliated cells in a microbead
clearance assay (*, P < 0.05; **, P < 0.01). Despite the canonical HDACi activity of vorinostat,
both hypoacetylated tubulin in the hindbrain, f, as well as hyperacetylated tubulin in the Gl tract,
g, was normalized. h, immunifluorescence images and i, plot showing that the % of ib4+ cells in
the Gl tract of tadpoles is increased in Rett tadpoles, which is indicative of inflammation and
heightened pain response, and that this can be rescued by vorinostat treatment.
772
773
[PAGE 36] Vorinostat normalizes the Rett phenotype in a mouse model
774
775
776
777
778
779
Because vorinostat was predicted to reverse the Rett state in our computational studies,
we evaluated its efficacy in the MeCP2-deficient male (MeCP2-/Y) mouse Rett model that is
commonly used in pre-clinical studies for Rett therapeutics, including trofinetide (Guy et al.,
2001). We first treated younger animals starting at day 31 post-partum (p31) as was done in
previous studies and confirmed that daily intraperitoneal (i.p.) administration of trofinetide (100
mg/kg) results in significant amelioration of multiple disease-related parameters, including
780
781
782
783
diarrhea and motor function, measured by a reduction in the established Bird score (Guy et al.,
2007) that incorporates a broad range of Rett-related CNS and non-CNS symptoms. When
vorinostat (50 mg/kg) and trofinetide were similarly administered i.p. on a daily basis over two
weeks and compared with vehicle control, we found that animals responded favorably to both
784
785
drugs (Fig. 4a); however, treatment with vorinostat resulted in improved neurological function
compared to trofinetide, as determined by measuring elevated plus maze (EPM) performance
786
(Fig. 4b). Both drugs also resulted in enhanced spatial novelty Y-maze performance (Fig. 4c)
787
and an improved diarrhea score (Fig. 4d).
788
789
790
791
792
As brain microglia have been implicated in Rett progression and therapeutic effects
(Cronk et al., 2015; Derecki et al., 2012; Schafer et al., 2016) based on their role in
neuroinflammation, waste removal, and synaptic pruning, we immuno-stained for microglia
using ionized calcium binding adaptor molecule (Iba-1), a microglia-specific marker, in sections
of MeCP2-/y mouse brains. Using Sholl analysis to assess microglia morphology (Timmerman et
793
794
795
al., 2018), we found that the MeCP2-/y microglia exhibited significantly stunted morphology with
fewer projection crossings compared to WT littermates, indicative of a heightened inflammatory
state, which vorinostat restored (Fig. 4e,f). This result, together with the reduction of multiple
796 serum inflammatory markers, including TNF-α, IL-4, IL-6, IL-16, CCL2, MIP3b, and CCI1 (Fig.
797
4g), suggests that animals with Rett experience a heightened inflammatory state, and that
798 treatment with vorinostat can suppress this inflammation.
799

786
(Fig. 4b). Both drugs also resulted in enhanced spatial novelty Y-maze performance (Fig. 4c)
and an improved diarrhea score (Fig. 4d).
As brain microglia have been implicated in Rett progression and therapeutic effects
(Cronk et al., 2015; Derecki et al., 2012; Schafer et al., 2016) based on their role in
neuroinflammation, waste removal, and synaptic pruning, we immuno-stained for microglia
using ionized calcium binding adaptor molecule (Iba-1), a microglia-specific marker, in sections
of MeCP2-/y mouse brains. Using Sholl analysis to assess microglia morphology (Timmerman et
al., 2018), we found that the MeCP2-/y microglia exhibited significantly stunted morphology with
fewer projection crossings compared to WT littermates, indicative of a heightened inflammatory
state, which vorinostat restored (Fig. 4e,f). This result, together with the reduction of multiple
serum inflammatory markers, including TNF-α, IL-4, IL-6, IL-16, CCL2, MIP3b, and CCI1 (Fig.
4g), suggests that animals with Rett experience a heightened inflammatory state, and that
treatment with vorinostat can suppress this inflammation.

[PAGE 39]
trofinetide (100 mg/kg), or vorinostat (50 mg/kg) from day 31 to 51 of age (ANOVA;
P<
0.0001). b, elevated-plus maze and, c, Y-novelty maze cognitive tests of MeCP2-/ mice
comparing vorinostat treatment efficacy to vehicle and trofinetide (ANOVA and Holm-Šídák test;
*, P < 0.05; **, P < 0.01). d, diarrhea scored using a 0-3 scale (ANOVA and Holm-Šídák test;
***, P < 0.001; ****, P < 0.0001). Representative images of Sholl analysis of microglial
arborization in mouse olfactory (e) and the Sholl analysis graph showing the branching profile of
microglia (f) in control versus Rett mice treated with or without vorinostat (ANOVA and Holm-
Šídák test; Control vs. Rett, P = 0.0004; Control vs. Vor, P < 0.0001). g, Levels of indicated
cytokines measured in plasma of control mice versus Rett mice with or without treatment with
trofinetide (Rett – Tro, 100 mg/kg), vorinostat (Rett – Vor, 50 mg/kg), or vehicle (Rett) for 3
weeks (mean values shown, N = 3, scale at right indicates z-score normalized to wild-type
vehicle-treated littermates). The observed baseline inflammatory state in Rett mice agreed with
published effects of MeCP2 knockdown(O'Driscoll et al., 2015).

[PAGE 39]
Oral vorinostat exhibits broad efficacy in Rett mice even after onset of symptoms
Pre-clinical studies for Rett therapies routinely dose MeCP2-/y mice prior to the onset of
symptoms (Castro et al., 2014; Szczesna et al., 2014) due to the rapid onset of symptoms and
short lifespan of animals, in contrast to patients who seek clinical care due to developmental
deficits which may not be diagnosed for several years before treatment could be initiated
(Tarquinio et al., 2015). To better mimic this more relevant clinical scenario, male MeCP2-/y
mice were dosed approximately one week after the onset of symptoms. Also, because long term
treatment of Rett patients would be best served by oral administration, and due to the fact that
our results showed a reduction in diarrhea in mice treated with vorinostat via daily i.p., we tested
the efficacy of an oral formulation of vorinostat. Interestingly, when we administered trofinetide
i.p. after symptoms developed in this model, it was found to be ineffective based on overall Rett
score, similar to the moderate efficacy observed in human clinical trials, whereas oral vorinostat
(50 mg/kg) prevented significant worsening of the symptom severity score (Fig. 5a), ameliorated
weight gain, and increased performance in EPM (Fig. 5b) and Y mazes (Fig. 5c). Animals
treated with oral vorinostat showed complete survival after 3 weeks of treatment, which is
comparable to what would be expected for vehicle-treated Rett animals for a study of this
duration, whereas only ~ 60% of trofinetide-treated Rett animals survived (Fig. 5d). To our
knowledge, this represents the first effective treatment of MeCP2-/y mice when treatment is
initiated after the onset of symptoms.

[PAGE 40]
Rett patients and mouse Rett models exhibit significant declines in fine motor and gait
control as well as Gl tract dysfunction(Hagberg, 2002; Motil et al., 2012). Importantly, the
deficiencies in mobility, gait, and hindlimb clasping, as well as increased diarrhea we also
observed in MeCP2-/y animals were again rescued by vorinostat treatment (Fig. 5e,f). Breathing
also was significantly improved following vorinostat treatment compared to trofinetide and
vehicle treatments (Fig. 5g). Given the putative effects of vorinostat on acetylation metabolism
and post-translational modification of tubulin and its disruption of ciliary function identified in
tadpoles, we also analyzed a-tubulin acetylation in the multi-ciliated cells in mouse lung
bronchioles, which revealed an overall increase of hyperacetylated a-tubulin in MeCP2-/y
animals that vorinostat again restored (Fig. 5h). In addition, we explored the potential link of
tubulin acetylation with muscle function and found that vorinostat treatment can rescue the
disrupted a-tubulin acetylation observed in femoral muscle sections (Fig. 5i). Increased
acetylation due to the loss of MeCP2 may play a role in muscle function as hyperacetylation has
been shown to increase stiffness and resistance in striatal muscles in vitro (Coleman et al.,
2021).
We continued to evaluate the possible impact of tubulin acetylation by examining the
colon, a biomechanically-active organ that is often distended in Rett patients and may play a
major role in digestive tract disruption that is a major complaint of these patients clinically (Motil
et al., 2012). Initial histological analysis of the colon indicated a greater degree of vacuolization
and heightened neutrophil infiltrate in MeCP2-null animals, which vorinostat and trofinetide
reversed (Fig. 5j). Staining of these sections for ẞIII- and acetylated a-tubulin also revealed that
acetylated a-tubulin is significantly more colocalized with neuronal staining in the colon in
MeCP2-null mice, and that this can be normalized by treatment with either vorinostat or
trofinetide (Fig. 5j). However, while vorinostat also normalized the ratio of acetylated a-tubulin
to ẞIII-tubulin, it was unexpectedly worsened by trofinetide (Fig. 5j,k). While the developing GI
tract of tadpoles prevented detailed analysis of their enteric neurons, the tubulin acetylation-
normalizing effect of vorinostat identified by network analysis in Xenopus clearly translated to
this mammalian (mouse) model at the cellular level.

[PAGE 41]
These data show that oral dosing of vorinostat improved classical disease outcome
metrics in MeCP2-null male mice and it ameliorated microglial dysfunction and hyperacetylation
of tubulin in their Gl and respiratory tracts as well as in skeletal muscle. Vorinostat also was
recently shown to be effective in treating Fragile X syndrome (Ding et al., 2021), which is closely
related to Rett, sharing both X-linked mutations and symptoms of autism, although it is caused
by a mutation in the FMR1 gene. Interestingly, we identified a loss of gene network connectivity
with FMR1 in the Rett-related Xenopus gene network (Fig. 1h), and genes with the maximum
variation and fold change differences in humans with Fragile X also occurred in pathway classes
involved in oxidative stress and multiple biosynthesis pathways that align with the major
regulators we identified by the cross-species MeCP2 mutant network analysis (Supplementary
Figure 6a and Supplementary Tables 7 and 8). Moreover, when we used nemoCAD to predict
drugs that might reverse the Fragile X genotype in humans, both the compound classes and
gene targets were similar to those predicted for Xenopus with MeCP2 knockdown, including a
high number of PPAR receptor agonists, HDAC inhibitors, and cyclooxygenase inhibitors
(Supplementary Figure 6b,c). Thus, these computational results suggest more broadly that

et al., 2012). Initial histological analysis of the colon indicated a greater degree of vacuolization
and heightened neutrophil infiltrate in MeCP2-null animals, which vorinostat and trofinetide
reversed (Fig. 5j). Staining of these sections for ẞIII- and acetylated a-tubulin also revealed that
acetylated a-tubulin is significantly more colocalized with neuronal staining in the colon in
MeCP2-null mice, and that this can be normalized by treatment with either vorinostat or
trofinetide (Fig. 5j). However, while vorinostat also normalized the ratio of acetylated a-tubulin
to ẞIII-tubulin, it was unexpectedly worsened by trofinetide (Fig. 5j,k). While the developing GI
tract of tadpoles prevented detailed analysis of their enteric neurons, the tubulin acetylation-
normalizing effect of vorinostat identified by network analysis in Xenopus clearly translated to
this mammalian (mouse) model at the cellular level.

These data show that oral dosing of vorinostat improved classical disease outcome
metrics in MeCP2-null male mice and it ameliorated microglial dysfunction and hyperacetylation
of tubulin in their Gl and respiratory tracts as well as in skeletal muscle. Vorinostat also was
recently shown to be effective in treating Fragile X syndrome (Ding et al., 2021), which is closely
related to Rett, sharing both X-linked mutations and symptoms of autism, although it is caused
by a mutation in the FMR1 gene. Interestingly, we identified a loss of gene network connectivity
with FMR1 in the Rett-related Xenopus gene network (Fig. 1h), and genes with the maximum
variation and fold change differences in humans with Fragile X also occurred in pathway classes
involved in oxidative stress and multiple biosynthesis pathways that align with the major
regulators we identified by the cross-species MeCP2 mutant network analysis (Supplementary
Figure 6a and Supplementary Tables 7 and 8). Moreover, when we used nemoCAD to predict
drugs that might reverse the Fragile X genotype in humans, both the compound classes and
gene targets were similar to those predicted for Xenopus with MeCP2 knockdown, including a
high number of PPAR receptor agonists, HDAC inhibitors, and cyclooxygenase inhibitors
(Supplementary Figure 6b,c). Thus, these computational results suggest more broadly that
developmental therapeutics approaches for neurodevelopmental disorders with similar broad
transcriptional effects may benefit from using this form of gene interaction network analysis to
identify network-level signatures characteristic of specific diseases and to predict drugs that
may reverse those changes.

[PAGE 44] DISCUSSION

Taken together, our results demonstrate the value of combining computational network
analysis-based drug repurposing algorithms with CRISPR technology to rapidly build novel in
vivo disease models using X. laevis that can be used to generate data and carry out screening
of drugs with activities of interest predicted computationally. The Xenopus tadpole model
developed here, which was generated in our laboratory within 3 weeks, exhibits a large degree
of genetic and phenotypic heterogeneity that reduces risks associated with computational and
screening outcomes by better capturing the disease state. Importantly, the Xenopus results
translated well to a mouse Rett model, and hence the tadpole model offers a faster, lower-cost,
and potentially much higher throughput alternative to mammalian models. In addition, our
target-agnostic computational approach enabled rapid discovery of novel mechanisms,
including the counterintuitive ability of an HDAC inhibitor to normalize both hypoacetylated
tubulin in the CNS and hyperacetylated tubulin in other organs, as well as identify drugs that
have broad efficacy across multiple organs. This approach led to the first demonstration of
efficacy in the mouse MeCP2 knockout model of Rett syndrome even when treated after the
onset of symptoms, in contrast with the lack of efficacy of trofinetide. Given the modest efficacy
of trofinetide in the clinic, conducting pre-clinical studies to restore health after the onset of
symptoms as in our Xenopus screen may be a more robust benchmark for efficacy in complex
CNS disorders. The drug discovery platform presented here offers Rett and other
neurodevelopmental patients the possibility of single small molecule therapeutics that address
multiple fundamental disease-modifying pathways with a broad clinical impact. Furthermore, by
identifying and rapidly evaluating existing drugs, potentially even in patients, our platform
enables the discovery of hidden therapeutic mechanisms for new drug development.

[PAGE 45] ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

We would like to thank Dr. Barbara J. Caldarone for guidance and assistance with the
mouse neurobehavioral assays, Dr. Amanda Graveline, Sarai Bardales, Andyna Vernet and
Melissa Sanchez-Ventura for their assistance with mouse studies, Thomas C. Ferrante for
guidance and assistance with image acquisition and analysis, Dr. Lay-Hong Ang and Suzanne
White for tissue immunostaining support, Dr. Aurelien Begue and Mahmoud El-Rifai for their
assistance with RNAscope experiments, and Erin Switzer and Emma Lederer for help with

[PAGE 45] ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We would like to thank Dr. Barbara J. Caldarone for guidance and assistance with the
mouse neurobehavioral assays, Dr. Amanda Graveline, Sarai Bardales, Andyna Vernet and
Melissa Sanchez-Ventura for their assistance with mouse studies, Thomas C. Ferrante for
guidance and assistance with image acquisition and analysis, Dr. Lay-Hong Ang and Suzanne
White for tissue immunostaining support, Dr. Aurelien Begue and Mahmoud El-Rifai for their
assistance with RNAscope experiments, and Erin Switzer and Emma Lederer for help with
Xenopus embryo fertilization and husbandry. All behavioral experiments were conducted at the
HMS Mouse Behavioral Core facility. M.L. gratefully acknowledges support of the Elisabeth
Giauque Trust, London. We are grateful for funding from the Wyss Institute for Biologically
Inspired Engineering at Harvard University through Validation Project support.

[PAGE 46] COMPETING INTERESTS
RN, FV, EG, ML, and DEI hold equity in Unravel Biosciences, Inc.; RN, FV, and DEI are
members of its board of directors; ML and DEI are members of its scientific advisory board; and
RN, FV, and EG are current employees of the company.

[PAGE 46] AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
RN, FV, and DEI conceived of and directed the work. RN, TL, MS, FV, EG, KS, KV, and
AV conducted animal studies and in vitro analyses. FV, MS, and VK developed and performed
CRISPR generation of Rett tadpole models with guidance by ML. SK, MS, SL, VC, and TT
performed bioinformatic analysis and computational drug prediction. SL and RN designed and
developed nemoCAD software. JRT guided Gl tract and lung immunostaining studies and
evaluated the histology and tissue staining. RN and DEI wrote the manuscript. All authors
reviewed and provided input for the manuscript.

[PAGE 46] DATA AVAILABILITY
All data used in this study, including the Xenopus microarray data, are publicly available
using accession codes listed in Supplementary Table 2.

[PAGE 47] CODE AVAILABILITY
Code is available upon reasonable request to the corresponding author.

[PAGE 47] REFERENCES
Abdala AP, Lioy DT, Garg SK, Knopp SJ, Paton JFR, Bissonnette JM. 2014. Effect of Sarizotan, a 5-HT1a
and D2-Like Receptor Agonist, on Respiration in Three Mouse Models of Rett Syndrome. Am J
Respir Cell Mol Biol 50:1031–1039. doi:10.1165/rcmb.2013-0372OC
Abuhatzira L, Makedonski K, Kaufman Y, Razin A, Shemer R. 2007. MeCP2 Deficiency in the Brain
Decreases BDNF Levels by REST/COREST-Mediated Repression and Increases TRKB Production.
Epigenetics 2:214-222. doi:10.4161/epi.2.4.5212
Aguiar DP, Sghari S, Creuzet S. 2014. The facial neural crest controls fore- and midbrain patterning by
regulating Foxg1 expression through Smad1 activity. Development 141:2494–2505.
doi:10.1242/dev.101790
Arsenault J, Hooper AWM, Gholizadeh S, Kong T, Pacey LK, Koxhioni E, Niibori Y, Eubanks JH, Wang L-Y,
Hampson DR. 2021. Interregulation between fragile X mental retardation protein and methyl
CpG binding protein 2 in the mouse posterior cerebral cortex. Hum Mol Genet 29:3744-3756.
doi:10.1093/hmg/ddaa226
Aslan Y, Tadjuidje E, Zorn AM, Cha S-W. 2017. High-efficiency non-mosaic CRISPR-mediated knock-in and
indel mutation in FO Xenopus. Development 144:2852–2858. doi:10.1242/dev.152967
Baikie G, Ravikumara M, Downs J, Naseem N, Wong K, Percy A, Lane J, Weiss B, Ellaway C, Bathgate K,
Leonard H. 2014. Gastrointestinal dysmotility in Rett syndrome. J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr
58:237-244. doi:10.1097/MPG.0000000000000200
Barbiero I, De Rosa R, Kilstrup-Nielsen C. 2019. Microtubules: A Key to Understand and Correct Neuronal
Defects in CDKL5 Deficiency Disorder? Int J Mol Sci 20:4075. doi:10.3390/ijms20174075
Basu T, O'Riordan KJ, Schoenike BA, Khan NN, Wallace EP, Rodriguez G, Maganti RK, Roopra A. 2019.
Histone deacetylase inhibitors restore normal hippocampal synaptic plasticity and seizure
threshold in a mouse model of Tuberous Sclerosis Complex. Sci Rep 9:5266.
doi:10.1038/s41598-019-41744-7
Browaeys R, Saelens W, Saeys Y. 2020. NicheNet: modeling intercellular communication by linking
ligands to target genes. Nat Methods 17:159–162. doi:10.1038/s41592-019-0667-5
Carobrez AP, Bertoglio LJ. 2005. Ethological and temporal analyses of anxiety-like behavior: The elevated
plus-maze model 20 years on. Neurosci Biobehav Rev, Defensive Behavior 29:1193–1205.
doi:10.1016/j.neubiorev.2005.04.017
Castro J, Garcia RI, Kwok S, Banerjee A, Petravicz J, Woodson J, Mellios N, Tropea D, Sur M. 2014.
Functional recovery with recombinant human IGF1 treatment in a mouse model of Rett
Syndrome. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 111:9941–9946. doi:10.1073/pnas.1311685111
Chahrour M, Zoghbi HY. 2007. The Story of Rett Syndrome: From Clinic to Neurobiology. Neuron 56:422-
437. doi:10.1016/j.neuron.2007.10.001
Chang Q, Khare G, Dani V, Nelson S, Jaenisch R. 2006. The disease progression of Mecp2 mutant mice is
affected by the level of BDNF expression. Neuron 49:341–348.
doi:10.1016/j.neuron.2005.12.027
Cheng F, Lu W, Liu C, Fang J, Hou Y, Handy DE, Wang R, Zhao Y, Yang Y, Huang J, Hill DE, Vidal M, Eng C,
Loscalzo J. 2019. A genome-wide positioning systems network algorithm for in silico drug
repurposing. Nat Commun 10:1–14. doi:10.1038/s41467-019-10744-6
Chien Y-H, Srinivasan S, Keller R, Kintner C. 2018. Mechanical Strain Determines Cilia Length, Motility,
and Planar Position in the Left-Right Organizer. Dev Cell 45:316-330.e4.
doi:10.1016/j.devcel.2018.04.007
Coleman AK, Joca HC, Shi G, Lederer WJ, Ward CW. 2021. Tubulin acetylation increases cytoskeletal
stiffness to regulate mechanotransduction in striated muscle. J Gen Physiol 153:e202012743.
doi:10.1085/jgp.202012743
Collins AL, Levenson JM, Vilaythong AP, Richman R, Armstrong DL, Noebels JL, David Sweatt J, Zoghbi HY.
2004. Mild overexpression of MeCP2 causes a progressive neurological disorder in mice. Hum
Mol Genet 13:2679–2689. doi:10.1093/hmg/ddh282
Colvin L, Fyfe S, Leonard S, Schiavello T, Ellaway C, Klerk N de, Christodoulou J, Msall M, Leonard H.
2003. Describing the phenotype in Rett syndrome using a population database. Arch Dis Child
88:38-43. doi:10.1136/adc.88.1.38
Cronk JC, Derecki NC, Ji E, Xu Y, Lampano AE, Smirnov I, Baker W, Norris GT, Marin I, Coddington N, Wolf
Y, Turner SD, Aderem A, Klibanov AL, Harris TH, Jung S, Litvak V, Kipnis J. 2015. Methyl-CpG
Binding Protein 2 Regulates Microglia and Macrophage Gene Expression in Response to
Inflammatory Stimuli. Immunity 42:679–691. doi:10.1016/j.immuni.2015.03.013
De Felice C, Signorini C, Leoncini S, Pecorelli A, Durand T, Valacchi G, Ciccoli L, Hayek J. 2012. The role of
oxidative stress in Rett syndrome: an overview. Ann NY Acad Sci 1259:121-135.
doi:10.1111/j.1749-6632.2012.06611.x
Dellu F, Contarino A, Simon H, Koob GF, Gold LH. 2000. Genetic Differences in Response to Novelty and
Spatial Memory Using a Two-Trial Recognition Task in Mice. Neurobiol Learn Mem 73:31-48.
doi:10.1006/nlme.1999.3919
Derecki NC, Cronk JC, Lu Z, Xu E, Abbott SBG, Guyenet PG, Kipnis J. 2012. Wild-type microglia arrest
pathology in a mouse model of Rett syndrome. Nature 484:105-109. doi:10.1038/nature10907
Ding Q, Wu X, Li X, Wang H. 2021. Vorinostat Corrects Cognitive and Non-Cognitive Symptoms in a
Mouse Model of Fragile X Syndrome. Int J Neuropsychopharmacol pyab081.
doi:10.1093/ijnp/pyab081
Downs J, Géranton SM, Bebbington A, Jacoby P, Bahi-Buisson N, Ravine D, Leonard H. 2010. Linking
MECP2 and pain sensitivity: The example of Rett syndrome. Am J Med Genet A 152A:1197–1205.
doi:10.1002/ajmg.a.33314

Collins AL, Levenson JM, Vilaythong AP, Richman R, Armstrong DL, Noebels JL, David Sweatt J, Zoghbi HY.
2004. Mild overexpression of MeCP2 causes a progressive neurological disorder in mice. Hum
Mol Genet 13:2679–2689. doi:10.1093/hmg/ddh282
Colvin L, Fyfe S, Leonard S, Schiavello T, Ellaway C, Klerk N de, Christodoulou J, Msall M, Leonard H.
2003. Describing the phenotype in Rett syndrome using a population database. Arch Dis Child
88:38-43. doi:10.1136/adc.88.1.38
Cronk JC, Derecki NC, Ji E, Xu Y, Lampano AE, Smirnov I, Baker W, Norris GT, Marin I, Coddington N, Wolf
Y, Turner SD, Aderem A, Klibanov AL, Harris TH, Jung S, Litvak V, Kipnis J. 2015. Methyl-CpG
Binding Protein 2 Regulates Microglia and Macrophage Gene Expression in Response to
Inflammatory Stimuli. Immunity 42:679–691. doi:10.1016/j.immuni.2015.03.013
De Felice C, Signorini C, Leoncini S, Pecorelli A, Durand T, Valacchi G, Ciccoli L, Hayek J. 2012. The role of
oxidative stress in Rett syndrome: an overview. Ann NY Acad Sci 1259:121-135.
doi:10.1111/j.1749-6632.2012.06611.x
Dellu F, Contarino A, Simon H, Koob GF, Gold LH. 2000. Genetic Differences in Response to Novelty and
Spatial Memory Using a Two-Trial Recognition Task in Mice. Neurobiol Learn Mem 73:31-48.
doi:10.1006/nlme.1999.3919
Derecki NC, Cronk JC, Lu Z, Xu E, Abbott SBG, Guyenet PG, Kipnis J. 2012. Wild-type microglia arrest
pathology in a mouse model of Rett syndrome. Nature 484:105-109. doi:10.1038/nature10907
Ding Q, Wu X, Li X, Wang H. 2021. Vorinostat Corrects Cognitive and Non-Cognitive Symptoms in a
Mouse Model of Fragile X Syndrome. Int J Neuropsychopharmacol pyab081.
doi:10.1093/ijnp/pyab081
Downs J, Géranton SM, Bebbington A, Jacoby P, Bahi-Buisson N, Ravine D, Leonard H. 2010. Linking
MECP2 and pain sensitivity: The example of Rett syndrome. Am J Med Genet A 152A:1197–1205.
doi:10.1002/ajmg.a.33314
Exner CRT, Willsey HR. 2021. Xenopus leads the way: Frogs as a pioneering model to understand the
human brain. genesis 59:e23405. doi:10.1002/dvg.23405
Forbes M. 2021. py-factorgraph.
Franken H, Mathieson T, Childs D, Sweetman GMA, Werner T, Tögel I, Doce C, Gade S, Bantscheff M,
Drewes G, Reinhard FBM, Huber W, Savitski MM. 2015. Thermal proteome profiling for
unbiased identification of direct and indirect drug targets using multiplexed quantitative mass
spectrometry. Nat Protoc 10:1567–1593. doi:10.1038/nprot.2015.101
Gabel HW, Kinde B, Stroud H, Gilbert CS, Harmin DA, Kastan NR, Hemberg M, Ebert DH, Greenberg ME.
2015. Disruption of DNA-methylation-dependent long gene repression in Rett syndrome. Nature
522:89-93. doi:10.1038/nature14319
Gaetani M, Sabatier P, Saei AA, Beusch CM, Yang Z, Lundström SL, Zubarev RA. 2019. Proteome Integral
Solubility Alteration: A High-Throughput Proteomics Assay for Target Deconvolution. J Proteome
Res 18:4027-4037. doi:10.1021/acs.jproteome.9b00500
Giacometti E, Luikenhuis S, Beard C, Jaenisch R. 2007. Partial rescue of MeCP2 deficiency by postnatal
activation of MeCP2. Proc Natl Acad Sci 104:1931–1936. doi:10.1073/pnas.0610593104
Glaze DG, Neul JL, Percy A, Feyma T, Beisang A, Yaroshinsky A, Stoms G, Zuchero D, Horrigan J, Glass L,
Jones NE. 2017. A Double-Blind, Randomized, Placebo-Controlled Clinical Study of Trofinetide in
the Treatment of Rett Syndrome. Pediatr Neurol 76:37–46.
doi:10.1016/j.pediatrneurol.2017.07.002
Gold WA, Lacina TA, Cantrill LC, Christodoulou J. 2015. MeCP2 deficiency is associated with reduced
levels of tubulin acetylation and can be restored using HDAC6 inhibitors. J Mol Med Berl Ger
93:63-72. doi:10.1007/s00109-014-1202-x
Guy J, Gan J, Selfridge J, Cobb S, Bird A. 2007. Reversal of Neurological Defects in a Mouse Model of Rett
Syndrome. Science 315:1143–1147. doi:10.1126/science.1138389
Guy J, Hendrich B, Holmes M, Martin JE, Bird A. 2001. A mouse Mecp2-null mutation causes neurological
symptoms that mimic Rett syndrome. Nat Genet 27:322-326. doi:10.1038/85899
Hagberg B. 2002. Clinical manifestations and stages of rett syndrome. Ment Retard Dev Disabil Res Rev
8:61-65. doi:10.1002/mrdd.10020
Han H, Cho J-W, Lee Sangyoung, Yun A, Kim H, Bae D, Yang S, Kim CY, Lee M, Kim E, Lee Sungho, Kang B,
Jeong D, Kim Y, Jeon H-N, Jung H, Nam S, Chung M, Kim J-H, Lee I. 2018. TRRUST v2: an
expanded reference database of human and mouse transcriptional regulatory interactions.
Nucleic Acids Res 46:D380–D386. doi:10.1093/nar/gkx1013
Hewapathirane DS, Dunfield D, Yen W, Chen S, Haas K. 2008. In vivo imaging of seizure activity in a novel
developmental seizure model. Exp Neurol 211:480–488. doi:10.1016/j.expneurol.2008.02.012
Hockly E, Richon VM, Woodman B, Smith DL, Zhou X, Rosa E, Sathasivam K, Ghazi-Noori S, Mahal A,
Lowden PAS, Steffan JS, Marsh JL, Thompson LM, Lewis CM, Marks PA, Bates GP. 2003.
Suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid, a histone deacetylase inhibitor, ameliorates motor deficits in a
mouse model of Huntington's disease. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 100:2041-2046.
doi:10.1073/pnas.0437870100
Huber KVM, Olek KM, Müller AC, Tan CSH, Bennett KL, Colinge J, Superti-Furga G. 2015. Proteome-wide
drug and metabolite interaction mapping by thermal-stability profiling. Nat Methods 12:1055-
1057. doi:10.1038/nmeth.3590
Huynh-Thu VA, Irrthum A, Wehenkel L, Geurts P. 2010. Inferring Regulatory Networks from Expression
Data Using Tree-Based Methods. PLOS ONE 5:e12776. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0012776
Kanehisa M, Goto S. 2000. KEGG: kyoto encyclopedia of genes and genomes. Nucleic Acids Res 28:27-
30.
Kerr AM, Nomura Y, Armstrong D, Anvret M, Belichenko PV, Budden S, Cass H, Christodoulou J, Clarke A,
Ellaway C, d'Esposito M, Francke U, Hulten M, Julu P, Leonard H, Naidu S, Schanen C, Webb T,
Engerstrom IW, Yamashita Y, Segawa M. 2001. Guidelines for reporting clinical features in cases
with MECP2 mutations. Brain Dev 23:208–211. doi:10.1016/S0387-7604(01)00193-0
Kulkarni SS, Griffin JN, Date PP, Liem KF, Khokha MK. 2018. WDR5 Stabilizes Actin Architecture to
Promote Multiciliated Cell Formation. Dev Cell 46:595-610.e3. doi:10.1016/j.devcel.2018.08.009
Labun K, Montague TG, Gagnon JA, Thyme SB, Valen E. 2016. CHOPCHOP v2: a web tool for the next
generation of CRISPR genome engineering. Nucleic Acids Res 44:W272-276.
doi:10.1093/nar/gkw398
Lamb J, Crawford ED, Peck D, Modell JW, Blat IC, Wrobel MJ, Lerner J, Brunet J-P, Subramanian A, Ross
KN, Reich M, Hieronymus H, Wei G, Armstrong SA, Haggarty SJ, Clemons PA, Wei R, Carr SA,
Lander ES, Golub TR. 2006. The Connectivity Map: using gene-expression signatures to connect
small molecules, genes, and disease. Science 313:1929–1935. doi:10.1126/science.1132939
Lebrun N, Delépine C, Selloum M, Meziane H, Nectoux J, Herault Y, Bienvenu T. 2021. HDAC inhibitor
ameliorates behavioral deficits in Mecp2308/y mouse model of Rett syndrome. Brain Res
147670. doi:10.1016/j.brainres.2021.147670
Li W, Pozzo-Miller L. 2014. BDNF deregulation in Rett syndrome. Neuropharmacology, BDNF Regulation
of Synaptic Structure, Function, and Plasticity 76:737–746.
doi:10.1016/j.neuropharm.2013.03.024
Lonowski LA, Narimatsu Y, Riaz A, Delay CE, Yang Z, Niola F, Duda K, Ober EA, Clausen H, Wandall HH,
Hansen SH, Bennett EP, Frödin M. 2017. Genome editing using FACS enrichment of nuclease-
expressing cells and indel detection by amplicon analysis. Nat Protoc 12:581-603.
doi:10.1038/nprot.2016.165
Luikenhuis S, Giacometti E, Beard CF, Jaenisch R. 2004. Expression of MeCP2 in postmitotic neurons
rescues Rett syndrome in mice. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 101:6033–6038.
doi:10.1073/pnas.0401626101
Martínez de Paz A, Sanchez-Mut JV, Samitier-Martí M, Petazzi P, Sáez M, Szczesna K, Huertas D, Esteller
M, Ausió J. 2015. Circadian Cycle-Dependent MeCP2 and Brain Chromatin Changes. PLoS ONE
10. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0123693
Mateus A, Määttä TA, Savitski MM. 2017. Thermal proteome profiling: unbiased assessment of protein
state through heat-induced stability changes. Proteome Sci 15:13. doi:10.1186/s12953-017-
0122-4
Miller RA, Ehrhart F, Eijssen LMT, Slenter DN, Curfs LMG, Evelo CT, Willighagen EL, Kutmon M. 2019.
Beyond Pathway Analysis: Identification of Active Subnetworks in Rett Syndrome. Front Genet
10:59. doi:10.3389/fgene.2019.00059
Morton J, Snider TA. 2017. Guidelines for collection and processing of lungs from aged mice for
histological studies. Pathobiol Aging Age-Relat Dis 7:1313676.
doi:10.1080/20010001.2017.1313676
Motil KJ, Caeg E, Barrish JO, Geerts S, Lane JB, Percy AK, Annese F, McNair L, Skinner SA, Lee H-S, Neul JL,
Glaze DG. 2012. Gastrointestinal and nutritional problems occur frequently throughout life in
girls and women with Rett syndrome. J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr 55:292-298.
doi:10.1097/MPG.0b013e31824b6159
Nalle SC, Zuo L, Ong MLDM, Singh G, Worthylake AM, Choi W, Manresa MC, Southworth AP, Edelblum
KL, Baker GJ, Joseph NE, Savage PA, Turner JR. 2019. Graft-versus-host disease propagation
depends on increased intestinal epithelial tight junction permeability. J Clin Invest 129:902-914.
doi:10.1172/JCI98554
Nenni MJ, Fisher ME, James-Zorn C, Pells TJ, Ponferrada V, Chu S, Fortriede JD, Burns KA, Wang Y, Lotay
VS, Wang DZ, Segerdell E, Chaturvedi P, Karimi K, Vize PD, Zorn AM. 2019. Xenbase: Facilitating
the Use of Xenopus to Model Human Disease. Front Physiol 10. doi:10.3389/fphys.2019.00154
NIH LINCS Program. n.d. https://lincsproject.org/

Martínez de Paz A, Sanchez-Mut JV, Samitier-Martí M, Petazzi P, Sáez M, Szczesna K, Huertas D, Esteller
M, Ausió J. 2015. Circadian Cycle-Dependent MeCP2 and Brain Chromatin Changes. PLoS ONE
10. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0123693
Mateus A, Määttä TA, Savitski MM. 2017. Thermal proteome profiling: unbiased assessment of protein
state through heat-induced stability changes. Proteome Sci 15:13. doi:10.1186/s12953-017-
0122-4
Miller RA, Ehrhart F, Eijssen LMT, Slenter DN, Curfs LMG, Evelo CT, Willighagen EL, Kutmon M. 2019.
Beyond Pathway Analysis: Identification of Active Subnetworks in Rett Syndrome. Front Genet
10:59. doi:10.3389/fgene.2019.00059
Morton J, Snider TA. 2017. Guidelines for collection and processing of lungs from aged mice for
histological studies. Pathobiol Aging Age-Relat Dis 7:1313676.
doi:10.1080/20010001.2017.1313676
Motil KJ, Caeg E, Barrish JO, Geerts S, Lane JB, Percy AK, Annese F, McNair L, Skinner SA, Lee H-S, Neul JL,
Glaze DG. 2012. Gastrointestinal and nutritional problems occur frequently throughout life in
girls and women with Rett syndrome. J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr 55:292-298.
doi:10.1097/MPG.0b013e31824b6159
Nalle SC, Zuo L, Ong MLDM, Singh G, Worthylake AM, Choi W, Manresa MC, Southworth AP, Edelblum
KL, Baker GJ, Joseph NE, Savage PA, Turner JR. 2019. Graft-versus-host disease propagation
depends on increased intestinal epithelial tight junction permeability. J Clin Invest 129:902-914.
doi:10.1172/JCI98554
Nenni MJ, Fisher ME, James-Zorn C, Pells TJ, Ponferrada V, Chu S, Fortriede JD, Burns KA, Wang Y, Lotay
VS, Wang DZ, Segerdell E, Chaturvedi P, Karimi K, Vize PD, Zorn AM. 2019. Xenbase: Facilitating
the Use of Xenopus to Model Human Disease. Front Physiol 10. doi:10.3389/fphys.2019.00154
NIH LINCS Program. n.d. https://lincsproject.org/
O'Driscoll CM, Lima MP, Kaufmann WE, Bressler JP. 2015. Methyl CpG binding protein 2 deficiency
enhances expression of inflammatory cytokines by sustaining NF-kB signaling in myeloid derived
cells. J Neuroimmunol 283:23–29. doi:10.1016/j.jneuroim.2015.04.005
Pearl J. 1982. Reverend bayes on inference engines: a distributed hierarchical approachProceedings of
the Second AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, AAAI'82. Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania: AAAI
Press. pp. 133-136.
Potts EM, Coppotelli G, Ross JM. 2020. Histological-Based Stainings using Free-Floating Tissue Sections. J
Vis Exp JoVE. doi:10.3791/61622
Pratt KG, Khakhalin AS. 2013. Modeling human neurodevelopmental disorders in the Xenopus tadpole:
from mechanisms to therapeutic targets. Dis Model Mech 6:1057–1065.
doi:10.1242/dmm.012138
Przanowski P, Wasko U, Zheng Z, Yu J, Sherman R, Zhu LJ, McConnell MJ, Tushir-Singh J, Green MR,
Bhatnagar S. 2018. Pharmacological reactivation of inactive X-linked Mecp2 in cerebral cortical
neurons of living mice. Proc Natl Acad Sci 115:7991–7996. doi:10.1073/pnas.1803792115
Renthal W, Boxer LD, Hrvatin S, Li E, Silberfeld A, Nagy MA, Griffith EC, Vierbuchen T, Greenberg ME.
2018. Characterization of human mosaic Rett syndrome brain tissue by single-nucleus RNA
sequencing. Nat Neurosci 21:1670–1679. doi:10.1038/s41593-018-0270-6
Russo PST, Ferreira GR, Cardozo LE, Bürger MC, Arias-Carrasco R, Maruyama SR, Hirata TDC, Lima DS,
Passos FM, Fukutani KF, Lever M, Silva JS, Maracaja-Coutinho V, Nakaya HI. 2018. CEMiTool: a
Bioconductor package for performing comprehensive modular co-expression analyses. BMC
Bioinformatics 19:56. doi:10.1186/s12859-018-2053-1
Ruthsatz K, Dausmann KH, Peck MA, Drees C, Sabatino NM, Becker LI, Reese J, Hartmann L, Glos J. 2018.
Thyroid hormone levels and temperature during development alter thermal tolerance and
energetics of Xenopus laevis larvae. Conserv Physiol 6. doi:10.1093/conphys/coy059
Sanfeliu A, Hokamp K, Gill M, Tropea D. 2019. Transcriptomic Analysis of Mecp2 Mutant Mice Reveals
Differentially Expressed Genes and Altered Mechanisms in Both Blood and Brain. Front
Psychiatry 10:278. doi:10.3389/fpsyt.2019.00278
Schafer DP, Heller CT, Gunner G, Heller M, Gordon C, Hammond T, Wolf Y, Jung S, Stevens B. 2016.
Microglia contribute to circuit defects in Mecp2 null mice independent of microglia-specific loss
of Mecp2 expression. eLife 5:e15224. doi:10.7554/eLife.15224
Sekhon RS, Briskine R, Hirsch CN, Myers CL, Springer NM, Buell CR, de Leon N, Kaeppler SM. 2013. Maize
gene atlas developed by RNA sequencing and comparative evaluation of transcriptomes based
on RNA sequencing and microarrays. PloS One 8:e61005. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0061005
Subramanian A, Narayan R, Corsello SM, Peck DD, Natoli TE, Lu X, Gould J, Davis JF, Tubelli AA, Asiedu JK,
Lahr DL, Hirschman JE, Liu Z, Donahue M, Julian B, Khan M, Wadden D, Smith IC, Lam D, Liberzon
A, Toder C, Bagul M, Orzechowski M, Enache OM, Piccioni F, Johnson SA, Lyons NJ, Berger AH,
Shamji AF, Brooks AN, Vrcic A, Flynn C, Rosains J, Takeda DY, Hu R, Davison D, Lamb J, Ardlie K,
Hogstrom L, Greenside P, Gray NS, Clemons PA, Silver S, Wu Xiaoyun, Zhao W-N, Read-Button
W, Wu Xiaohua, Haggarty SJ, Ronco LV, Boehm JS, Schreiber SL, Doench JG, Bittker JA, Root DE,
Wong B, Golub TR. 2017. A Next Generation Connectivity Map: L1000 Platform and the First
1,000,000 Profiles. Cell 171:1437-1452.e17. doi:10.1016/j.cell.2017.10.049
Szczesna K, de la Caridad O, Petazzi P, Soler M, Roa L, Saez MA, Fourcade S, Pujol A, Artuch-Iriberri R,
Molero-Luis M, Vidal A, Huertas D, Esteller M. 2014. Improvement of the Rett Syndrome
Phenotype in a Mecp2 Mouse Model Upon Treatment with Levodopa and a Dopa-Decarboxylase
Inhibitor. Neuropsychopharmacology 39:2846-2856. doi:10.1038/npp.2014.136
Tarquinio DC, Hou W, Neul JL, Lane JB, Barnes KV, O'Leary HM, Bruck NM, Kaufmann WE, Motil KJ, Glaze
DG, Skinner SA, Annese F, Baggett L, Barrish JO, Geerts SP, Percy AK. 2015. Age of diagnosis in
Rett syndrome: patterns of recognition among diagnosticians and risk factors for late diagnosis.
Pediatr Neurol 52:585-591.e2. doi:10.1016/j.pediatrneurol.2015.02.007
The Comparative Toxicogenomics Database | CTD. n.d. http://ctdbase.org/
Timmerman R, Burm SM, Bajramovic JJ. 2018. An Overview of in vitro Methods to Study Microglia. Front
Cell Neurosci 12. doi:10.3389/fncel.2018.00242
Tsai P-Y, Zhang B, He W-Q, Zha J-M, Odenwald MA, Singh G, Tamura A, Shen L, Sailer A, Yeruva S, Kuo W-
T, Fu Y-X, Tsukita S, Turner JR. 2017. IL-22 Upregulates Epithelial Claudin-2 to Drive Diarrhea and
Enteric Pathogen Clearance. Cell Host Microbe 21:671-681.e4. doi:10.1016/j.chom.2017.05.009
Varderidou-Minasian S, Hinz L, Hagemans D, Posthuma D, Altelaar M, Heine VM. 2020. Quantitative
proteomic analysis of Rett iPSC-derived neuronal progenitors. Mol Autism 11:38.
doi:10.1186/s13229-020-00344-3
Vashi N, Justice MJ. 2019. Treating Rett syndrome: from mouse models to human therapies. Mamm
Genome. doi:10.1007/s00335-019-09793-5
Willsey HR. 2021. Whole-Mount RNA In Situ Hybridization and Immunofluorescence of Xenopus
Embryos and Tadpoles. Cold Spring Harb Protoc 2021:pdb.prot105635.
doi:10.1101/pdb.prot105635
Yang Z, Steentoft C, Hauge C, Hansen L, Thomsen AL, Niola F, Vester-Christensen MB, Frödin M, Clausen
H, Wandall HH, Bennett EP. 2015. Fast and sensitive detection of indels induced by precise gene
targeting. Nucleic Acids Res 43:e59. doi:10.1093/nar/gkv126