Identification of brain-like functional information architectures in
embryonic tissue of Xenopus laevis.
Thomas F. Varley, 1, 2, * Vaibhav P. Pai,³, * Caitlin Grasso, 2
Jeantine Lunshof,4,5 Michael Levin, and Josh Bongard1, 2
1 Vermont Complex Systems Center, University of Vermont, Burlington, VT
2 Department of Computer Science, University of Vermont, Burlington, VT†
3 Allen Discovery Institute, Tufts University, Medford, MA
4 Wyss Institute for Biologically Inspired Engineering at Harvard, Boston, MA
5 Department of Genetics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA
(Dated: December 5, 2024)


[PAGE 2] Abstract
Understanding how populations of cells collectively coordinate activity to produce the complex
structures and behaviors that characterize multicellular organisms is a fundamental issue in modern
biology. Here we show how mathematical techniques from complex systems science and multivariate
information theory can provide a rigorous framework for inferring the structure of collective
organization in non-neural tissue. Many of these techniques were developed and refined in the context of
theoretical neuroscience, a field well-used to the problem of inferring coordinated activity in
high-dimensional data. In neuroscience, these statistics (functional connectivity network structure,
modularity, higher-order information, etc) have been found to be altered during different cognitive,
clinical, or behavioral states and are generally thought to be informative about the underlying dynamics
linking biology to cognition. Here we show that these same patterns of coordinated activity
are also present in the aneural tissues of evolutionarily distant biological systems: preparations of
self-motile embryonic Xenopus tissue (colloquially known as “basal Xenobots"). When analyzing
calcium recordings from basal Xenobots and comparing them to fMRI recordings from a sample of
adult human brains, we find that the bots have a "brain-like" functional information architecture,
complete with positive and negative functional connections, meso-scale communities, higher-order
redundant and synergistic interactions, and integrated information that is "greater than the sum
of its parts". By comparing each recording (brain and bot) to a personalized null model that
preserves all first-order statistical structures (autocorrelation, frequency spectrum, etc.) while
disrupting all higher-order interactions, we show that these are genuine higher order interactions
and not trivially reducible to lower-order features of the data. These similarities suggest that such
patterns of activity and information structures either: arose independently in these two systems
epithelial constructs and brains, are epiphenomenological byproducts of other dynamics conserved
across vastly different configurations of life; or somehow directly support adaptive behavior across
diverse living systems.
Keywords: Developmental biology, neuroscience, functional connectivity, emergence, synergy,
multivariate information theory.


[PAGE 2] I. INTRODUCTION
One of the hallmarks of biological systems is what cybernetician Warren Weaver called
“organized complexity” [1]. In contrast to simple, physical systems with just a few elements
that can be well-described by formal mathematical models, biological systems display highly
non-trivial structures that manifest complexity at multiple scales [2, 3]. Understanding the
nature and structure of organized complexity is a canonical problem in modern biology,
which considers interactions between ensembles of biomolecules, cells, organs, and individuals.
Additionally, beyond mere complexity, biological systems have a clear capacity to
engage in sophisticated self-assembly and repair of complex anatomical structures. This is
not merely emergent complexity for its own sake, but rather dynamic problem-solving capacity
[3, 4]. Collectives of cells and tissues homeostatically navigate the space of anatomical
states during embryogenesis, regeneration, and cancer suppression [5, 6]. These states occur
at scales much larger than the cells and molecular networks that implement them, requiring
global coordination and virtual governor dynamics that adaptively manipulate subsystems
to reach the correct species-specific target morphology and physiological states despite a
range of unpredictable circumstances [5, 7]. While biologists intuitively recognize the presence
of this high-level organization and control, and have noted its importance for applications
in biomedicine [8, 9] and bioengineering [10], quantifying it for rigorous study has
proven difficult, due to the inherent difficulties in understanding high-dimensional, multi-scale
processes [11]. Parallels between the functionality of electrophysiological networks in
the brain and in non-brain tissue have been discussed, because of their common evolutionary
and developmental origin, and many invariants across neuro-behavioral and morphogenetic
problem-solving [12, 13]. Nevertheless, major knowledge gaps exist with respect to what
kind of information patterns are being implemented in neural and non-neural tissues.
The challenge, then, is how can we infer the structure these high-dimensional processes
given limited, and often noisy, empirical data? One of the most well-developed approaches
is studying how information is distributed over the component elements of the system, and
the structure of the dependencies that form the “scaffold” of on-going, spontaneous dynamics
[14]. These approaches have been most well-developed in the field of computational neuroscience,
where large datasets of high-temporal and high-spatial resolution time series are
frequently recorded using methodologies like fMRI, EEG, and MEG [15]. From these data,
a whole library of tools have been developed that characterize the structure of multivariate
interactions and describe them with a variety of formal statistics.
In the context of neuroscience, these techniques have revealed a rich architecture of
different kinds of interactions, between neurons, neuronal networks, and whole regions of
cortex [16, 17]. Despite these findings, however, many of these techniques have remained
sequestered in neuroscience, leaving it unclear to what extent the patterns observed in the
brain are "brain-specific", or if these patterns of brain activity reflect larger features of
information processing dynamics across biological systems. The answer to this question
would be a contribution to the emerging field of Diverse Intelligence research [18-20], which
seeks to understand how cognitive capacities arise and are adaptively implemented in a wide
range of material substrates and problem-spaces.
To do this, we compare temporal information dynamics in two, radically diverse systems:
resting state fMRI data from human brains, and calcium signaling data recorded from preparations
of embryonic Xenopus tissue known colloquially as "Xenobots" [21, 22]. The term
“Xenobot” is very broad and refers to a number of different preparations: here we specifically
deal with so-called “basal Xenobots”, which represent a kind of default configuration,
lacking some of the additional features seen in [21, 22]. The latter are autonomously-motile,
self-assembling constructs derived from ectoderm (epidermal progenitor) cells from the frog
Xenopus laevis, which are used in the field of biorobotics as a chassis in which competencies
of living materials in novel configurations can be assessed, and for which techniques to
induce novel useful behaviors can be developed [23]. Because of their morphogenetic and
behavioral properties, their lack of nervous system, their synthetic (ecologically-unique and
novel) nature, and their amenability to optical interrogation, they are an interesting model
system to compare to the dynamics observed in neural constructs, which have been under
long periods of selection for specific functionality in a fixed configuration. While fMRI data
and calcium signals from basal Xenobots represent two radically different biological systems,
they share important commonalities: both a basal Xenobot and a brain are a “whole” system
which can be subdivided into distinct sub-systems, or “parts” (cortical parcels in fMRI
data, individual cells in basal Xenobots). From each of these parcels, we can record time
series data, and explore how interactions between lower-level elements (parcels, cells) are
structured in relation to each-other, and the collective whole.
Here we systematically explore the presence of higher-order interactions in the basal
Xenobot cellular structure, and show that those patterns are similar to those found in the
dynamics of the adult human brain. Recent prior work on calcium signaling has shown
that xenopus epidermal organoid systems (with no autonomous motion behavior) do show
signs of non-trivial functional organization [24], however an in-depth, comparative analysis
remains an outstanding question. Multicellular patterns of calcium signaling are widespread
in biology, and complex patterns (waves, bursts, and oscillations) have been found in diverse
systems, including animal epithelial tissue [25, 26], plant tissue [27], and fungal mycelial networks
[28]. These coordinated dynamics have been found to be crucial for many dynamical
and self-organizing processing in biology; examples include skin development [29], regeneration
[30], wound healing [31], and cell-type differentiation [32]. While the role of calcium
transients in diverse biological processes is well-developed, and the apparent complexity
of multi-cellular patterns of calcium activity have been qualitatively described in terms of
waves, oscillations, and other large-scale patterns, a rigorous, formal analysis of multivariate
information-processing structures in networks of signaling cells has not been done.
The vast majority of these particular statistics were first developed in the context of
theoretical neuroscience for application to the analysis of neuroimaging data, and have been
found to correlate with various features of cognition, health, and disease. A systematic
review of all the measures can be found in the Materials and Methods, but we will briefly
describe them and relevant findings in the context of neuroscience. The first, and most
fundamental inference is that of signed, functional connectivity networks that form the architecture
of the whole system (see Sec. V D). In the brain, consistent functional connectivity
networks have been found in all neuroimaging modalities [33, 34], and include a complex
distribution of positively and negatively signed dependencies between brain regions, indicating
correlated and anti-correlated patterns of activity. These interactions between positive
and negative edges are thought to play a key role in the maintenance of non-trivial structure
[35-37], and alterations to the distribution of positive and negative edges has been associated
with cognitive and clinical differences [38-41]. The networks themselves are organized
hierarchically, with edges arranged into a modular, meso-scale structure of communities
with high internal co-fluctuation (associated with positively-signed edges) and anticorrelations
between communities [17, 42], and changes in this modular structure are associated
with behavioral and cognitive differences as well [43-45]. A limitation of all of these analyses
is that they are built on pairwise models of interaction: in the functional connectivity
framework, the fundamental unit is the bivariate edge, and higher-order interactions can
only be inferred indirectly by considering patterns of lower-order interactions [46]. To get
around this limitation, there has recently been an increase in interest in truly higher-order
interactions in complex systems [47], using techniques from information theory to assess
polyadic synergies and redundancies directly. Analysis of neural data has found that these
higher-order interactions are widespread throughout the human brain [46, 48], and changes
in higher-order interactions have been observed in the context of aging [49–51], neurodegeneration
[52], autism [53], schizophrenia [54], and sequel to neurosurgery [55]. All of these
statistics are summary statistics, which describe some feature of the average structure of

[PAGE 6]
the system. To deepen our analysis, we also explored time-resolved metrics. The first was
the variance of the instantaneous co-fluctuation, which describes frame-resolved changes in
integration-segregation balance over time [56–59], and the second was the integrated information
[60], which measures how much more effectively an observer can predict the future of
a whole based on a model of its true joint statistics versus a disintegrated model. Changes
in integrated information have been found to be most closely associated with changes to
consciousness following anesthesia or brain injury [61, 62]. This literature from neuroscience
shows that patterns of collective behavior are not merely statistical “noise” or some kind
mathematical shell game, but rather that they reflect meaningful differences in the underlying
processes that generate complex cognition and behavior, sometimes with clinical or
quality-of-life implications.

A natural question of this line of work, is whether the comparison of calcium signals from
basal Xenobots and fMRI time series from humans is a “fair” comparison; these are different
organs, different organisms, different scales, and different imaging modalities. We believe
that, first, this difference is as much a feature as it is a bug, as it provides an opportunity to
test the extent to which these patterns, widespread in brain activity, are actually modality-
specific or system-specific, and to think about what reasons could prevent applications of
information metrics to specific kinds of materials. Second, these two datatypes are not as
different as they appear on first blush. The key similarity is that they both describe a
"whole” unit, parcellated into component “parts.” In the basal Xenobot, we have coverage
of calcium activity from the camera-facing surface of the bot, while in the fMRI, we have
coverage from the entire surface of the brain (the cortex). Contrast this with calcium
recordings of spiking neurons (e.g. [63]), which typically only sample a small number of
neurons from the whole brain. The “whole” is not recorded from in this case, making the
structure of part-whole-relationships inaccessible. The data themselves also have similarities
that help facilitate comparison: recordings are generally short (on the order of a few hundred
frames), the signals are real-valued (unlike spiking neurons), and generally autocorrelated,
which means that a common set of information-theoretic estimators and a common null
model can be appropriately used in both cases.

In this paper, we are not comparing brains and basal Xenobots directly (e.g. we are not
asking "which system has more total correlation"): differences in system sizes, the properties
of the recordings, and variable first order dynamics can introduce complex and hard-to-

[PAGE 7]
untangle biases in the estimation of information-theoretic quantities [14]. Instead, we show
that both systems consistently display greater integration than you would expect if the
elements were independent. It is well known that certain lower-order features of a time series
can complicate analysis of higher-order interactions [64], requiring careful consideration to
avoid Type 1 errors [65]. Doing this requires constructing a bespoke null model for each
fMRI recording and each basal Xenobot that preserves all first-order features of the elements
(autocorrelation, frequency spectrum, etc.) while disrupting any interactions between
them. To do this, we use a circular-shift null model (for details see Materials and Methods)
to preserve first order features while disrupting higher-order interactions between elements.

Morphogenesis is based on coordinated activities of individual cells resulting in a collective
outcome. Thus, we hypothesized that, despite being radically different kinds of systems, that

[PAGE 8]
the basal Xenobots would show non-trivial information structure, indicative of complex,
higher-order organization, despite the comparative “simplicity” of the system (relative to
the brain). Our results largely bear this hypothesis out: we found that, for all measures
tested, both the basal Xenobots and the brains showed significantly greater higher-order
integration than would be expected in the null case of independent elements with preserved
first-order statistics.

[PAGE 8] RESULTS

[PAGE 8] A. Basal Xenobots show non-trivial, spatially-embedded functional connectivity
networks.

In order to determine whether basal Xenobots showed patterns of information integration
and emergent dynamics in a manner similar to the human brain, we computed a battery of
measures on both calcium signals recorded from basal Xenobots (N=28) and fMRI BOLD
signals recording from resting adult human brains (N=50). We found that, despite their
comparatively simple biological structure the basal Xenobots displayed every sign of emergent
complexity at significantly greater intensities than was observed in surrogate null data
that preserved first-order features. When constructing functional connectivity networks, in
every single brain, and every single bot, we found that positive and negative functional correlations
were widely present, while in the autocorrelation-preserving nulls, there was almost
no correlation to speak of. These correlations form the functional connectivity network: every
element in the system (cortical parcels from brains, cells for basal Xenobots) forms a
vertex, and the weight of the edge between them is the Pearson correlation between their
respective time series. When considering the spatial embedding of edges, we found that
basal Xenobots displayed a stereotyped pattern also typically found in the brain: a negative
correlation relating the Euclidean distance between two cells and the edge dependency between
them. All twenty eight bots had statistically significant negative correlations between
signed functional edge weight and distance (average r = -0.124±0.06, all p-values less than
10-6). The same pattern was observed in the fMRI data: all brains showed a negative correlation
between functional edge weight and Euclidean distance (average r = -0.237±0.03,
all p-values less than 10-100). While the distance/functional connectivity relationship was

[PAGE 9]

certainly weaker in the basal Xenobots than in the brains, we should note that the brain
regions are represented in three-dimensional space, while the basal Xenobot cells are only
represented in two-dimensional space, reducing the available degrees of freedom. This shows
that basal Xenobots have a non-trivial functional structure, more closely resembling the
brain than a disintegrated system of independent cells, and that the spatial embedding of
bots informs on the kinds of communication that cells can engage in, in a way that is reminiscent
of cortical communication. These results also replicate findings first observed in


[PAGE 9] FIG. 2. Data preparation and matrix construction. A: This cartoon describes the production
of basal Xenobots from frog embryonic tissue. Caps are excised by hand and cultured for seven days
without perturbation; the resulting autonomously moving epidermal cell structure is a "basal" (i.e.
unmodified) Xenobot. B: The pipeline for learning functional connectivity patterns from basal
Xenobots. Videos of the bots are segmented into individual cells, from which average calcium
traces are extracted. The covariance matrix defines the functional connectivity, which can be
organized into meso-scale communities following clustering. C: The same pipeline, but for human
brain data recorded with an fMRI; in this case, the elements are cortical regions (corresponding
to the Schaefer 200 parcellation [66]) and the signal is BOLD rather than calcium, but the overall
pipeline remains the same.


[24], in a closely-related organoid model system. Multi-resolution community detection [67]
finds that, in both brains and bots, these positive and negative correlations are arranged
into a meso-scale structure of multiple distinct communities that are internally positively
correlated, with anticorrelations between them. These communities group vertices (cortical

[PAGE 10] FIG. 3. Similar expression of complex functional connectivity structures in basal
Xenobots and brains. A-B Scatterplots of the Pearson correlation coefficient of functional
connectivity edge strength against Euclidean distance, plotted against the p-value of the correlation.
Clearly in both brains and basal Xenobots, there is a strong negative correlation between
functional connectivity strength and spatial distance, as would be expected from an embedded system.
C-D: Scatterplots of the difference between Euclidean distance within functional connectivity
modules against the p-value of the difference. There is a consistent pattern that cells within functional
modules are also closer to each-other in space. E-H: Box plots showing the higher-order
structures in sets of three, four, and five elements for total correlation (E), dual total correlation
(F), those multiplets with positive O-information (G, indicating redundancy), and those multiplets
with negative O-information (H, indicating synergy). I The variance in RSS timeseries for each
system, compared to the respective nulls. J The TSE-complexity for each system, compared to
their respective nulls. K The corrected whole-minus-sum integrated information ΦR for each system
and their respective nulls.


[PAGE 11] parcels in brains, cells in basal Xenobots) into sub-systems that are more strongly connected
within themselves than they are between other groups of vertices. For visualization
of example modular covariance matrices, see Figure 2. If we consider the spatial embedding
modules, we find that in basal Xenobots, cells that are grouped within modules tend to
be closer in space than cells grouped into different modules (average ∆ = −0.02 ± 0.02),
with 20 of 28 bots showing a statistically significant difference (p < 0.05, Bonferroni corrected).
For visualization, see Figure 3C-D. The relationship between spatial embedding
and modules was more consistent in the fMRI scans, but followed the same pattern: average
A = -0.047 ± 0.02, and all fifty recordings showed a statistically significant difference
(p < 0.05, Bonferroni corrected). In the brain these modules are associated with distinct
functional systems, such as the default mode network, or the fronto-parietal control network
[42], but their significance in the bots is decidedly less clear. They may reflect distinct
types of cells, or areas that (if normal development were allowed to continue) are destined
to differentiate into distinct mature systems. For visualization, see Figure 2A-B.

[PAGE 11] B. Time-resolved analysis shows dynamic integration and segregation balance

The functional connectivity results describe the average dependency between two elements.
To assess whether the patterns of co-fluctuation were similar at the highest possible
level of temporal resolution, we used an edge time series analysis [56, 68], which decomposes
the average correlation into a series of instantaneous couplings (see Materials and Methods).
To construct a summary statistic from the edge time series, we considered the variance of
the root-sum-squares (RSS) for every frame across every node. The variance of the RSS acts
like a crude Fano factor [69]: if all elements are independent, the variance of the RSS will be
zero, likewise if all time series are copies of each-other. Variance of RSS is highest when the
system combines moments of instantaneous integration and segregation at different times.
Both the basal Xenobots and the fMRI scans had a significantly higher empirical variance
in the RSS of co-fluctuations than their respective nulls. For visualization, see Figure 3I.
The variance for the basal Xenobots was 1168.179 ± 823.86, significantly greater than the
basal Xenobot nulls, which had variance of 405.06 ±308.59 (Cohen's D = 1.227, p < 10-9).
In the fMRI scans, the variance was 4667.169 ± 1630.249, which was significantly greater
than the null variance: 211.797 ± 14.641 (Cohen's D = 3.865, p < 10-14). These results

[PAGE 12] suggest that both the brains and the basal Xenobots have a rich temporal dynamic combining
a mixture of transient integration and segregation: in some frames all the cells are
co-fluctuating together, while in others they are behaving as if they are independent.

[PAGE 12] C. Basal Xenobots show emergent, higher-order information dependencies

When considering polyadic information describing coordinated activity between multiple
elements, we found that all forms of higher-order information were significantly enriched
in both brains and basal Xenobots compared to their respective nulls. So far, all of the
measures discussed have been pairwise: describing some feature of the interaction between
dyads of elements. To explore genuine higher-order interactions comprising sets of three
or more elements, we turned to multivariate information, and specifically, generalizations
of the mutual information: the total correlation, the dual total correlation, and the O-
information [70, 71]. The total correlation and dual total correlation both quantify different
notions of what it means for a set of multiple variables to “share” information [72, 73], while
the O-information gives a heuristic measure of whether the overall information structure is
dominated by redundant or synergistic dependencies [71]. For visualization, see Figure 3E-
H. In fMRI scans, across multiplets of size three regions, four regions, and five regions, the
average total correlation [72] was 0.326±0.267 nats, significantly greater than their respective
nulls 3.5 × 10-5 ±2.65 × 10-5 nats (Cohen's D = 1.726, p < 10-100). The same was true with
basal Xenobots, which had an average total correlation of 0.2±0.27 nat, greater than the null
average of 0.00017±0.0003 nat (Cohen's D = 1.029, p < 10-100). The total correlation
can be understood as a measure of functional synchrony, as it is maximal when all time

[PAGE 13] series are copies of each-other, these results suggest that the brains and the basal Xenobots
both share features of multi-element synchrony in BOLD and calcium data respectively.
The same pattern was true when using the dual total correlation [73]. In fMRI scans, the
average dual total correlation was 0.2996±0.228 nat, significantly greater than the null 3.53 ×
10-5±2.65×10-5 nat (Cohen's D = 1.859, p < 10-100). Similarly, with basal Xenobots, the
empirical average dual total correlation was 0.18±0.22 nat, significantly greater than the null
0.0002±0.0003 nat (Cohen's D = 1.15, p < 10-100). The dual total correlation quantifies the
amount of "entangled information"; information that is duplicated over multiple elements.
The finding that both brains and basal Xenobots have significant amounts of dual total
correlation indicates the presence of complex, multivariate interactions binding together
information across multiple elements in both systems. When considering the O-information,
the analysis is a little more complex, as the sign of the O-information is meaningful in
addition to its absolute value: if the sign is negative, then the system in question is dominated
by synergistic dependencies (information in the whole that is not present in the parts), while
if the sign is positive, the system is dominated by redundant dependencies (information
copied over multiple elements) [71]. Crucially, if the system is comprised of solely bivariate
dependencies, then the O-information is zero, and by implication, whatever information is
visible must be truly polyadic. The simplest analysis is to consider the relative absolute
values of the O-information between empirical and null datasets, as that will give a heuristic
measure of the presence of beyond-pairwise information (redundant or synergistic). We
found that both brains and basal Xenobots had significant polyadic information. In empirical
fMRI, the average absolute value of the O-information was 0.039 ± 0.065 nat, significantly
greater than the null fMRI data 8.41 × 10⁻⁸ ±7.9 × 10-8 nats (Cohen's D = 0.852, p < 10-100).
Similarly, in empirical basal Xenobots, the absolute value of the O-information was 0.016±
0.08 nat, significantly greater than the disintegrated null: 9.07 × 10-9 ±2.5 × 10-6 (Cohen's
D = 0.3, p < 10-100). Since the O-information can disambiguate between two flavors
of higher-order information, we can also break the dataset down into two parts based on
sign, representing those multiplets that are redundancy dominated and those multiplets
that are synergy-dominated. When we consider only redundancy-dominated multiplets, we
find the same pattern as the absolute value of the O-information. The fMRI data had
significantly more redundancy (0.05 ± 0.076 nat) than the null data (6.4e – 08 ± 7.63e – 08,
Cohen's D = 0.945, p < 10-100), and likewise the basal Xenobots have significantly more
redundancy as well (0.036±0.09 nats) than the nulls (6.35×10⁻⁷ ±2.47×10⁻⁶, Cohen's D =
0.52, p < 10-100). When considering the synergy, we find the same pattern: when considering
only multiplets with negative O-information, the fMRI data had significantly more synergy
(-0.018±0.026 nat) compared to the associated nulls (-9.16 × 10⁻⁸ ±7.87 × 10⁻⁸, Cohen's
D = -0.964, p < 10-100). The basal Xenobots showed the same pattern, with the empirical
data having significantly greater synergy (-0.01 ± 0.023 nat) compared to the associated
nulls (-6.27 × 10⁻⁷ ± 2.36 × 10⁻⁶, Cohen's D = -0.66, p < 10-100). These results show
that, not only do basal Xenobots have statistically significant higher-order information,
but that they have both higher-order redundancies and synergies, in a manner that is typical
of the human brain (as recorded with fMRI). Redundancies and synergies have been found
throughout the natural world; beyond brains, synergistic dependencies have also been found
in sociological [74] data, climate data [75, 76], economic data [77], psychometric data [78],
physical phase changes [79], and even the structure of musical scores [80]. Consequently,
higher-order synergy may reflect a very general kind of “integrated sophistication" common
to many complex systems.
The final higher-order functional connectivity measure that we used was the Tononi-
Sporns-Edelman (TSE) complexity [81], which provides a measure of the balance between
integration and segregation (somewhat analogous to the O-information's balance of redundancy
and synergy). A high TSE complexity suggests that integration and segregation are
co-existing in some non-trivial way. In the fMRI data, we found that the TSE complexity
was much greater in the empirical data (19662.089 ± 519.661 nat) compared to the associated
nulls (3.82 ± 0.339, Cohen's D = 53.498, p < 10⁻¹⁵). The same pattern
is apparent in the basal Xenobots, with the empirical bots having a very high TSE complexity
(24857.58 ± 38739.62) compared to the associated nulls (7.79 ± 11.73, Cohen's D =
0.9, p < 10⁻⁹). These results collectively show that the functional structure of the basal
Xenobots show sophisticated, multi-cell coordination that is highly similar to what is seen
in human brain activity. For visualization, see Figure 3J.

[PAGE 14] D. Basal Xenobots integrate information over time

So far, all of the measures that we have computed are functional measures: they model
the dynamics of the BOLD signal or calcium signal as independent frames. We also wanted
to consider the effective connectivity, which quantifies the extent to which the past state of
elements discloses information about their collective future: this is a dynamic measure that
accounts for the temporal integration of the whole system. To do this we computed the
whole-minus-sum integrated information [60, 82], which provides a measure of how much
more predictive power there is when modeling the system based on its true joint statistics
compared to the sum of all the parts modeled independently. We computed a corrected
version of the integrated information to ensure that it was non-negative [83], for details see
Sec VH. We found that both the basal Xenobots and the brain had significantly greater
dynamic integrated information compared to their respective nulls. In the fMRI data, the
average integrated information was 0.072±0.071 nat, significantly higher than the associated
null 0.012 ± 0.004 (Cohen's D = 1.197, p < 10⁻¹¹). In the basal Xenobots, the average
integrated information was 0.09±0.11 nat, significantly greater than the null 0.005 ±0.001
nat (Cohen's D = 1.072, p < 10⁻⁷). For visualization, see Figure 3K.
All of these results have fit a common pattern: whatever the measure of structure applied,
both the brains and basal Xenobots show statistically significantly greater structure than a
null model that preserves lower-order dynamics but disrupts higher-order ones. This suggests
that there is a large number of “features” of structural organization that are shared by both
basal Xenobots and brains, despite their radically different biological substrates.

[PAGE 15] III. DISCUSSION
... (continues as in Extraction 3, including the rest of the document with corrected formatting and consistent use of symbols like ΦR, ⊙, etc.)