Towards a better understanding of causation in cell biology
Brash, D. E.1, Bizzarri, M.2, Briscoe, J. 3, Stern, C. D. 4, Grieneisen, V. A. 5,
and Levin, M.6*
Depts. of Therapeutic Radiology and Dermatology and Yale Cancer Center, Yale
School of Medicine, 333 Cedar St., New Haven, CT 06520-8040, USA
University La Sapienza, Dept. of Experimental Medicine, via Scarpa 16, 00161
Rome, Italy
The Francis Crick Institute, 1 Midland Road, London NW1 1AT, UK
Dept. Cell & Developmental Biology, University College London, Gower Street,
London WC1E 6BT, UK
School of Biosciences, Cardiff University, Museum Avenue, Cardiff CF10 3AX,
UK
Allen Discovery Center at Tufts University, 200 Boston Avenue, Suite 4600,
Medford, MA 02155, USA
* Email: michael.levin@tufts.edu

What does it mean to say that event X caused outcome Y in biology?
Explaining the causal structure underlying the dynamic function of living systems
is a central goal of biology. Transformative advances in regenerative medicine and
synthetic bioengineering require efficient strategies for causing desired system-
level outcomes. We present a perspective on why it is critical to move beyond the
classical 'necessary and sufficient' approach to define biological causality.

[PAGE 2] From genes to processes in developmental biology
Genes that control the development of specific tissues have been identified and
organized into pathways, which has increased our understanding of how tissues are
formed and what goes wrong in disorders and diseases. As a consequence, biological
processes tend to be described by genes and gene networks. The result is a gene-centric
view with genes assigned fixed and specific functions within hierarchical mechanisms, in
which master regulators are the drivers of a developmental process. But developmental
biology is more than a catalogue of parts. Understanding mechanisms must include a
description of the activity and the causal relationship between components. This
description shifts the attention to morphogenic patterns and connections between
components, providing conceptual insight into how and why processes occur. Such
change in perspective requires an interdisciplinary mix of theory and experiment. In cases
where this approach has been followed 1, the picture that arises reveals more
sophistication and subtlety than implied by simple hierarchical genetic wiring diagrams.
Nonlinearity and multi-level feedbacks in even small systems can have unexpected
consequences. Reasoning that follows a linear logic becomes inadequate because the
distinction between cause and effect is lost, and the explanation for how a process occurs
will require an understanding of how relationships change over time. Describing and
understanding these dynamics is now the challenge facing twenty-first century
developmental biologists.
Through next-generation sequencing, protein interactomes, metabolomics and
quantitative genetics, modern biology has become obsessed with compiling lists. But it is
difficult, if not impossible, to understand processes from lists and merely undertaking the
effort at multiple scales does not suffice. Many of the current approaches to studying
biological events have turned us away from asking the key questions needed to
understand a biological process. Shifting our attention to patterns, connections and
processes is what is needed, but not simply to make different types of lists. Emphasis
should be placed on designing experiments to test alternative explanations for the
observed behaviors. The experiments should make predictions of how one or another
model might fit with the observations, so that the experiment, along with its controls, can
distinguish between different mechanisms. This 'critical experiment' approach is the
opposite of making lists, which effectively increases the number of dimensions. This change in focus and experimental
design, will largely use the "IF (x is TRUE) THEN (y) ELSE (z)" logic of computational
approaches. The approach becomes iterative with each round of analysis including
more data (produced by consecutive experiments) as well as more knowledge to
reformulate the question. Ideal models make counter-intuitive predictions that can be
tested rigorously — a crucial aspect of distinguishing between possible explanations.

[PAGE 3] Biophysical properties as causes
The current Gene Regulatory Network (GRN) formalism is not well-suited to
explain the influence of spatially distributed physical factors, most of which manifest as
constraints, arising from multiple interactions and physical fields. A constraint specifies
some limits on independent behaviors of a dynamical system and this can provide access
to new states unavailable to the unconstrained system. A specific case is provided by
studies performed on mammalian cells cultured in microgravity that undergo changes in
shape morphology and functions, leading to the partitioning of cells into two different
populations. Yet, by separately re-seeding these populations once more in microgravity,
two distinct phenotypes emerge from each cell cluster 3. This experiment demonstrates
that a biological field ‘deprived' of the gravity constraint does not provide a stable
environment for differentiation, as it favors a never-ending transition among different
phenotypes leading to a consequent change in the GRN state of activation. In other words,
in the absence of physical constraints the environment cannot select between two
different phenotypes due to the emergence of a 'permanent transition state', while the
presence of physical cues force the system into a specific differentiated state. Constraints,
by providing the system with a deterministic output that would otherwise have been
impossible to obtain, act thereby as organizing principles during cell differentiation.
If we look beyond the single cell level, regulative embryogenesis and regeneration
exemplify the still poorly understood decision-making processes by which cells cooperate
toward the dynamic maintenance and repair of complex 3-dimensional structures 4.
Salamanders regenerate entire limbs and, crucially, they stop precisely when a correct
limb structure is complete. Tadpoles with highly abnormal faces nevertheless can become
normal frogs, underscoring the fact that genomes encode not hardwired cell movements
for metamorphosis but a system of large-scale remodeling that implements profound
plasticity, reaching the species-specific target morphology despite drastic interventions.
Remarkably, the setpoint of this anatomical homeostasis can be re-written, e.g. as trophic
memory. In deer antler regeneration, ectopic tines will form at sites of prior years' injuries
in an antler rack replacing one that has already been shed; in planarian axial patterning,
a transient stimulus can make permanent lines of genetically-normal 2-headed worms.
An important component of such control systems appears to be biophysical, with
instructive information encoded by bioelectric state dynamics distributed across tissues.
The anatomical pattern that defines the target (and the stop condition) for regeneration
can be permanently altered, for example by transiently modulating the state of bioelectric
circuits. This strategy is already being used in model systems for repairing birth defects
and inducing complex regeneration. Expanding comfortable paradigms of master
regulator genes and cell-level epigenetics to include a physiological layer that enables
robust computation and pattern memory will be essential to improving the understanding
and control of the adaptive remodeling of growth and form.


[PAGE 4] Cause and constraint, physics and biology
The billiard ball model of causality has lured biologists into using knock-down and
overexpression approaches to test linear, unidirectional models of biological systems that
are not actually built this way. Linearity is broken by
branching pathways and unidirectionality is broken by feedback, which can occur on
different levels of biological organization (molecular, cellular, tissue-, organ- and
organism-level). Models of single-level interactions are broken by biological hierarchy. An
archetype is the Chladni plate. If we sprinkle a flat plate with sand grains and set it to
vibrate, distinctive patterns emerge, which will differ depending on shape or size of the
plate, with different patterns emerging as a result of vibration frequency changes or local
constraints, such as our thumb placed on the plate's corner. The pattern results from
collisions of sand grains governed by Newton's Laws. The precise collisions might be
computed, but are in fact irrelevant, as the collisions will be different tomorrow. However,
the patterns reproducible independently of these alterations, remaining consistent with
the external constraints such as the plate's size and shape, and the frequency of vibration.
So what is meaningful for understanding the patterns is not to seek a description of the
links between sand grains but the rules that link the higher-level patterns to constraints
— a new form of causality focusing on determinants rather than instigators. A key first
step is to identify the constraints.  Three useful refinements of causality in physics and engineering can be imported into
biology: A shift from causes acting at a single site in an organism and instigating changes
in a linear pathway, to looking at the behavior of the entire system, including the
constraints that shape it. A shift from studying molecular events to discrete pattern states,
"eigenisms" analogous to the eigenstates of quantum mechanics that can only exist in a
small number of distinctly different states. A shift from medicines that briefly control a
single target to treatments that put constraints on many parts of the organism, sustained
over time.

Furthermore, to these principles, biology adds an inevitable duality of causation.
Ludwig von Bertalanffy described the state of biology in 1928 as “dominated by the
'mechanistic' world view... that is, it (biology) tried to model itself according to the pattern
set by physics.”.

[PAGE 5] Biological causation goes beyond asking how a system of proteins establishes
heterogenous patterning, and seeks to explain what the biological function is. For
example, stating that small GTPases are activated by GAPs and inactivated by GEFs,
and that GTPase activity regulates downstream events, is like stating that A leads to B.
However, defining the function of these interactions (providing intrinsic polarity
information to the cell) requires us to operate on a different conceptual level. This is in
stark contrast with physics, in which a causational understanding of physical phenomena
is (generally) devoid of function. By comparing species that have evolved multicellularity
independently, such as in the animal and plant kingdoms, we are now able to search for
fundamental mechanisms adopted by life, by identifying conserved and modified
functions rather than conserved components (such as protein structures, DNA, etc).
Such comparative approaches, using understanding of system processes rather than
system components, gives insight into how tissue polarity is established and why it has
done so in a particular manner. Thus, causation in biology should define how and why a
process occurs in a certain manner. Notwithstanding the qualitative challenge of defining
such biological causation, the quantitative approaches of mathematical modelling and
experimentation are required 5 to test quantitative constraints needed to appropriately
direct a biological process.

[H1] [PAGE 6] Conclusions and outlook
Despite biologists' general awareness of redundancy and homeostatic control
circuits, we still largely do not understand the corrective, self-organizing processes that
reliably reach complex, systems-level patterning goals. This insight is key in contexts
where the outcome is an emergent result of coupled, parallel processes, and it will be
increasingly important for knowing when machine learning strategies could be an
appropriate approach to extract actionable, efficient control policies from the ever-
increasing deluge of data. Importantly, extensive work in fields such as philosophy,
physics and engineering has identified profound problems with respect to naïve models
of causation 6, which still pervade experimental biology. Advances in mathematical
approaches that extract causal control structures from biological data 7 and an increased
awareness of the presence and importance of variability, stochasticity, heterogeneity, and
noise are revolutionizing the search for effective causes of complex biological states and
processes. An appreciation of new kinds of instructive influences, from network science
and physics, must be coupled with hypothesis testing, focused on models of functional
processes (not necessarily molecular components). Developing methodology for the
rigorous identification and efficient control of causal processes in complex biological

[PAGE 7]
systems is very much a nascent field that has not been widely integrated with molecular
approaches to growth and form. At stake is not only perceptive review of manuscripts and
grants (in which distinguishing between causes and epiphenomena is a key goal), but the
development of efficacious next-generation interventions in regenerative, cancer and
synthetic biology.

Competing interests
The authors declare no competing interests.