Aging as a Loss of Goal-Directedness:
An Evolutionary Simulation
Léo Pio-Lopez, Benedikt Hartl, Michael Levin*

[PAGE 2] Abstract
Aging is an extensive biological process characterized by morphological and functional alterations in cellular and extracellular components, resulting in a systematic decline in biological functions ultimately leading to death. Although substantial advancements have been made in manipulating lifespan in model organisms like C. elegans and mice through genetic, dietary, and pharmacological means, the fundamental mechanisms driving aging in humans remain elusive and widely debated. In addition, there is no comprehensive computational platform capable of making predictions on aging in multicellular systems and integrating the multiscale competency of lifeforms. We propose an evolutionary hypothesis: aging arises because evolution has prioritized development, only to a limited extent incorporating a regenerative program beyond adulthood. Using a cybernetic tissue model and information dynamics analysis, we find: (1) Absence of Long-Term Morphostasis: Aging emerges naturally after development due to the lack of an evolved regenerative goal, rather than just specific detrimental properties of developmental programs (e.g., antagonistic pleiotropy or hyperfunction); (2) Acceleration Factors vs. Root Cause: Cellular noise, reduced competency, communication failures, and genetic damage all accelerate aging but are not its primary cause; (3) Information Dynamics in Aging: Aging correlates with increased active information storage and transfer entropy, while spatial entropy measures distinguish two dynamics—loss of structure and morphological noise accumulation; (4) Dormant Regenerative Potential: Despite organ loss, spatial information persists in the cybernetic tissue, indicating a memory of lost structures, which can be reactivated for organ restoration through targeted regenerative information; and (5) Optimized Regeneration Strategies: Restoration is most efficient when regenerative information includes differential patterns of affected cells and their neighboring tissue, highlighting strategies for rejuvenation. These findings provide a novel perspective on aging dynamics with significant implications for longevity research and regenerative medicine.


[PAGE 2] 1. Introduction
1.1. The theories of aging
Aging is a system-level, near-ubiquitous biological process characterized by morphological and functional alterations in cellular and extracellular components, resulting in a systematic decline in biological functions [1]. This degenerative process is modulated by genetics, lifestyle, and environmental factors [2]. As cellular functionality diminishes with age, there is a corresponding decrease in physiological capacities and an enhanced vulnerability to a spectrum of diseases, including cardiovascular disorders, cancer, neurodegenerative diseases, type II diabetes, and various infections. These conditions collectively compromise the quality of human life [2,3]. Figure 1 (A) schematically illustrates the typical life cycle of a complex organism comprising various stages from embryogenesis through maturity, decline, aging, and eventual death.

Several theories have been proposed to explain the aging process, that we can classify into damage-based and programmatic theories [1,4,5], with the former being more extensively studied [1,3,6,7]. Damage-based theories assert that aging results from the accumulation of molecular damage, impacting crucial cellular components like the genome, telomeres, mitochondria, and proteins, driven by imperfect repair mechanisms [6-8]. Conversely, programmatic theories suggest that aging is genetically predetermined, or quasi-programmed and encoded within the genome, not merely due to stochastic accumulation of damage [9-11].

Antagonistic pleiotropy, is one of the latter theories and posits that certain genes have beneficial effects in early life but detrimental effects in later life. These genes confer advantages such as increased fertility and resilience in youth, which are critical for survival and reproduction. However, as an individual ages, the same genes contribute to aging and decline because their negative effects accumulate. The theory suggests that natural selection favors these genes because of their early-life benefits, despite their harmful subsequent impacts. This results in a trade-off between early benefits and later costs [12]. Another related idea is the hyperfunction theory, which suggests that aging is not primarily a result of accumulating molecular damage or genetic programming, but rather due to a continuous and excessive operation of cellular growth processes that were beneficial during the earlier stages of life[13,14]. Central to this theory is the role of the Target of Rapamycin (TOR) pathway, which is a major regulator of growth and metabolism in cells. During the growth phase of an organism's life, the TOR pathway promotes cellular and organismal growth by driving processes like protein synthesis, nutrient uptake, and cell division. These functions are vital for development and reproductive success. However, aging arises when these growth-promoting activities are not appropriately down-regulated after the organism has passed its reproductive prime. Instead of adjusting to a maintenance mode that would be more suitable for the non-reproductive phase of life, the TOR pathway continues to stimulate cellular processes actively. This ongoing activity can lead to “hyperfunction", where cellular components and systems are overstimulated [13,14]. It is not clear, in that scenario, why the efficient processes of morphological homeostasis [15,16] do not orchestrate these active processes toward upkeep of functional anatomy (c.f., Figure 1 (B,C)). Our approach is consistent with the antagonistic pleiotropy and hyperfunction models in that we also propose that fundamental morphogenetic processes are involved in aging. However, in our view, the problem isn't that early morphogenetic processes need to be shut off in adulthood. Rather, we focus on the essential role of these processes in establishing and maintaining complex anatomical structures – in effect, navigating the space of possible organ and tissue arrangements as needed while sub-components continuously fail and must be replaced on-the-fly. Morphogenetic processes offer remarkable plasticity and robustness, building and repairing bodies despite radical injury and alterations of components and environment (reviewed in [17,18]). Adulthood, and the rigors of daily life, is precisely when these processes are needed, in the context of stress, degeneration, and cell replacement, to maintain the Ship of Theseus that is the body. But they can only do this if they have a clear setpoint within anatomical space that serves as the target of error reduction homeostasis. We propose, and simulate the consequences of, the hypothesis that the aging phenotype results from morphogenetic processes losing their targeted navigation of anatomical morphospace. Damage-based theories of aging, such as accumulated noise or genetic damage, might accelerate - but not fundamentally induce - this process by changing the operational mode of the homeostatic loops of cells (or other organismal components), effectively "overwriting" target goal states.

[PAGE 4] 1.2. Knowledge gaps
Recent research suggests a shift in our understanding of aging, proposing that it results from changes in biological information processing rather than solely from cellular and molecular damage. This concept, linked to a malfunction in the “software of life”, focuses on how aging processes are governed by epigenetic changes, either bioelectrical or chromatin modifications [5,19,20]. The differing dynamics, capabilities, and failure modes of the molecular layer and the physiological computational layers have long been studied in neuroscience, but are only now beginning to be related to areas such as developmental biology and cancer [21-25]. Novel computational frameworks are needed to begin to integrate these ideas in aging and longevity research.

Although substantial advancements have been made in extending lifespan in simple model organisms through genetic, dietary, and pharmacological means [2,26,27], the fundamental mechanisms driving aging in humans remain elusive and widely debated. Current life extension strategies show limited effectiveness [? ]. Much of the research has adopted a bottom-up approach, focusing on the biological hardware, the cellular components such as genes, molecular pathways, and, more recently, the epigenome. However, managing aging at such a micro-level may not be practical for complex structures like human anatomy [16,28,29]. This suggests that a broader, possibly more integrated approach may be necessary in order to fully understand and effectively intervene in the aging process.
Computational modeling has proven useful in the past to help characterize dynamics guiding complex morphogenesis [30-35]. However, to the best of our knowledge, there is currently no computational model in the literature explicating the aging process as a loss of goal-directedness, or directionality within the morphogenetic control system. The field is mostly dominated by experimental approaches and focused on the mathematical and computational modelling of a specific hallmark of aging [6], network approaches to aging or the impact of the environment on aging [36-39]. One prior study utilizes - similar to our model a neural cellular automaton (see next section) approach to perform morphogenesis. However, to stabilize morphogenesis, an adversarial approach was necessary with the intention of preventing anatomies from growing uncontrollably after differentiable development, rather than studying aging and its causes per se [40]. Existing mathematical models have not yet captured the biological signaling dynamics in aging tissue or revealed the underlying information dynamics that drive aging and the progressive degradation of anatomy over time. Unlike previous approaches, we uniquely address this gap by developing an evolutionary framework that integrates both molecular and systemic aspects of aging within a multi-competency architecture. Our model demonstrates how cells, trained solely through evolution to execute developmental tasks, inherently lack a regenerative goal post-development. By simulating this dynamic, we reveal that aging arises from the absence of targeted navigation in anatomical morphospace after development, offering a novel perspective on the root cause of aging. Moreover, our approach uncovers the potential for dormant regenerative programs to be reactivated, enabling targeted restoration of anatomical structures (c.f., Figure 1).

[PAGE 4] 1.3. Biological architecture of the model
Morphogenesis is the result of multicellular collectives acting together to achieve a specific endpoint within the space of anatomical possibilities [41] (see Figure 1). This process is driven by intercellular communication and information processing, where cells use different communication channels (biochemical, biomechanical or bioelectrical) to exchange information with their neighbors in a tissue [42,43] and implement a process of anatomical homeostasis where deviations from the species-specific target morphology are progressively minimized by active changes in growth and form. This enables cells to adaptively respond in a context-sensitive manner and regulate their behavior through local signaling protocols while collectively following a system-level agenda to grow and maintain an organism's species-specific anatomical form in a self-orchestrated way. Thus, the development of embryonic tissues, the growth and remodeling of adult organs, and even the suppression of cancer and aging can be understood as morphological computation [42]. In this sense, morphogenesis can be seen as an intermediate layer of physiological computation between genetic variation and a mature anatomical phenotype (see Figure 1 (C)), significantly effecting the process of evolution [30,41].

Another important aspect of biology, so far neglected in the models of aging is multiscale competency [17,41,44] (see Figure 1 (B, C)). Biological systems implement an architecture in which context-sensitive problem-solving operates across various levels, from molecular networks to individual cells, tissues, organs, organisms, and even collective groups such as swarms. This structure allows biological entities to solve problems within specific domains and problem spaces relevant to each scale (metabolic, physiological, anatomical, and behavioral state spaces), contributing to the overall adaptability and resilience of life [42,43,45]. At the molecular and cellular level, biological units navigate metabolic spaces to remain within adaptive regions despite changing circumstances. At higher organizational levels, these units form tissues and organs, which tackle more complex and larger-scale physiological and morphological problems. For instance, cells can make autonomous decisions to maintain local balance while contributing to larger-scale biological processes like tissue repair or development and how higher levels of organization constrain and facilitate the behavior of their parts [41,46–51]. This enables organisms to adapt to changing conditions and maintain functionality even when faced with disruptions, as observed in regulative development and regeneration where cellular activity is managed toward specific anatomical outcomes despite injury, changes of cell number and size, etc. [18]. This is critical because resistance to both cancer and aging must involve upkeep of complex structures and a resistance to their progressive decline within the Ship of Theseus of the body [52].

A key advantage of this multiscale architecture is that each level is capable of addressing its own problem-spaces without needing constant guidance from higher organizational structures (local homeodynamic competency, see Figure 1 (C)). This decentralized problem-solving approach ensures that different biological processes, from cell division to behavioral adaptation, occur simultaneously and efficiently. Furthermore, this structure allows biological systems to be both robust and flexible, as failures at one level can often be compensated for by others. Additionally, the interplay between levels within this architecture enables the emergence of complex properties that cannot be explained by examining components in isolation. For example, the collective behavior of cells during processes like regeneration or morphogenesis illustrates how local interactions scale up to contribute to the organism's overall form and function [17]. Similarly, defects of collective behavior can lead to developmental defects or aging. These interactions are not merely a sum of their parts; rather, they represent emergent capabilities that arise from the coordinated effort of biological subunits. The relative autonomy of layers in biology must surely impact on evolutionary and physiological constraints and drivers of aging, making it essential to study their properties with respect to the lifespan of individuals and evolutionary lineages.

This hierarchical but integrated organization is essential for the evolution of complex life forms. It promotes adaptability, allowing organisms to respond to environmental changes, evolve new features, and develop intricate systems that support survival and reproduction. Moreover, this multiscale competency architecture provides a framework for innovation in fields such as synthetic biology and regenerative medicine [22,28,53], where understanding and harnessing these principles could lead to breakthroughs in tissue engineering, organismal repair and aging [19,53]. This aspect of living forms—the critical layer of computational, problem-solving competency that lies between the genotype and the phenotype—is an essential component of any theory of aging that integrates evolutionary and physiological dynamics to understand this complex phenomenon. Thus, we focused our computational model on the role of multiscale morphogenetic competency in the aging process.

[PAGE 5] 1.4. Our computational model
Recently [30], we quantitatively investigated in silico the influence of varying levels of cellular competency of a multi-scale competency architecture [41,42] on the evolutionary process. We utilized tools from Artificial Life [54], a field of research focused on developing computational and cybernetic models that exhibit life-like behavior based on ideas derived from biology; prominent examples are Cellular Automata [55–58] such as Conway's Game of Life [59]. Specifically, we deployed Neural Cellular Automata [60] (NCAs) as a model for evolving morphogenesis (see Figure 2 (A-C)): NCAs comprise a regular spatial grid of locally interacting cellular agents which maintain a numerical state vector that is regulated by an internal, cell-specific Artificial Neural Network (ANN). In that way, the cells of an NCA can be trained to perform a collective self-orchestrated system-level task, such as morphogenesis [30-32] or even collective navigation behavior [44,61], solely via successive perceptions of their local environment, i.e., reading neighboring cell state information, and computing corresponding actions to regulate their own states in accordance with a system-level agenda.

Thus, NCAs exhibit striking similarities with the genome- and collective intelligence-based multi-scale competency architectures of biological life [41,44,63,64]: the instructions of how to grow an organism from the bottom up is encoded in its genome, corresponding to the NCA's (functional) ANN parameters. Moreover, through subsequent localized perception-action cycles of their ANN-based unicellular agents, NCAs model the intercellular communication- and intracellular information processing pathways of the adaptive and flexible internal decision-making mechanisms of biological cells: while biological cells regulate their gene expressions via gene regulatory networks, the cells of an NCA regulate their cell types via their internal ANN, and while biological cells utilize bio-electrical and molecular cues for intercellular signaling, cells in an NCA exchange numerical state information alike. In both cases, such communication pathways are localized between neighboring cells while the collective of cells may still follow a global agenda to self-orchestrate the process of morphogenesis and thereby give rise to the anatomical form of a system-level organism. Here, we use ANNs to model the memory, decision-making, and integrated information processes operating inside of cells [65-69].
Following our previous work [30], we deploy a swarm of virtual unicellular agents on the spatial grid of an NCA. Each agent hosts a decision-making machinery modeled by an ANN (notably, identical ANNs are deployed for each cell throughout a particular NCA instance), enabling the cellular agents to perceive neighboring cell states and independently propose cell-state regulatory actions, as illustrated in Figure 2 (A, B) and detailed below. Furthermore, we utilize evolutionary algorithms (EAs) [70] to optimize the parameters of NCAs, comprising structural and functional parts [30], such that the cellular agents evolve to self-assemble a particular spatial target pattern of predefined cell states in a fixed number of developmental steps, solely based on local communication rules, see Figure 2 (C).

[PAGE 7] 2. Material and methods
2.1. Neural Cellular Automaton: A Multi-Agent Model for Morphogenesis, and Aging?
Cellular Automata (CAs) were initially introduced by von Neumann to study self-replicating machines [55]. Since then, they have become widely used as simple models for Artificial Life [54]. The core concept behind CAs revolves around maintaining a discrete spatial grid of cells, each individual cell *i* being assigned a binary, numerical, or even vector-valued state cᵢ(tₖ) at every time step tₖ. The evolution of these cell states over time follows local update rules. Specifically, we have that cᵢ(tₖ₊₁) = u(Nᵢ(tₖ)), where u(·) is a function of the current state of cell *i*, i.e., cᵢ(tₖ) = cᵢ₀(tₖ), and of the states cᵢᵥ(tₖ) of its iᵥ = i₁,………, iₙ neighboring cells, which we collect in the matrix Nᵢ(tₖ) = (cᵢ₀(tₖ),..., cᵢₙ(tₖ)).

Despite their typically simple and predefined update rules, CAs often exhibit complex dynamics (c.f., Conway's Game of Life [59]) and have even been employed for universal computation tasks, as in Wolfram's rule 110[56,57].

Neural Cellular Automata (NCAs) [60] can be seen as an extension to “traditional" CAs. In this context, the local update rule is replaced with a more flexible ANN, u(·) → fₑ(·), where *e* denotes the set of trainable parameters of the ANN, fₑ(·) (see, e.g., Appendix A in Ref. [30]). By employing Machine Learning (ML) techniques, NCAs have been utilized to perform tasks such as self-orchestrated pattern formation [31], the simultaneous co-evolution of a rigid robot's morphology and controller [44], and have been proposed as a promising candidate for robust, decentralized controllers of autonomous drug delivery systems [61].

An NCA is essentially a grid of interconnected cells, each equipped with an identical ANN that is capable of perceiving the numerical states of its immediate cellular neighbors, Nᵢ(tₖ), and proposing actions, aᵢ(tₖ) = fₑ(Nᵢ(tₖ)), to regulate its own cell state, following the equation

cᵢ(tₖ₊₁) = cᵢ(tₖ) + aᵢ(tₖ) + σc, (1)

where we also account for possible imperfections in the cell-specific state updates via a Gaussian noise term of amplitude σc.

Thus, the cellular agents of an NCA perceive the numerical states of their immediate, respective neighborhoods, Nᵢ(tₖ), at any given time step, tₖ, to update their own states (c.f., Figure 2 (A, B)). Importantly, we do not include any explicit signature of aging in our model, i.e., no cell-internal marker or explicit input to the cellular agents other than their self-regulated cellular states that would contain temporal information.

However, being immersed in a dynamical multi-cellular environment where every part has its own agenda, the cellular agents' state updates can also be utilized for active communicating with their neighbors, following a policy π(Nᵢ(tₖ)) ≈ fᵨ(Nᵢ(tₖ)). From the perspective of Reinforcement Learning [74], an NCA can thus be considered a trainable multi-agent system that needs to utilize local communication rules to achieve a target system-level outcome.

So far, our approach is agnostic to the particular ANN architecture of the update function, fᵨ(·). Closely following Ref. [30], we here briefly describe the genuine ANN architecture deployed in our cellular agents, which is schematically depicted in Figure 2 (B): Inspired by Ref. [75], we partition an NCA's cell's ANN into (i) a sensory part, εᵢᵥ = f⁽ˢ⁾(cᵢᵥ(tₖ)) ∈ ℝˢ, preprocessing each neighborhood cell state separately into a respective sensor embedding, which we collect in the matrix E(Nᵢ(tₖ)) = (εᵢ₀(tₖ), ..., εᵢₙ(tₖ)). These sensor embeddings are then (ii) averaged across all neighbor embeddings into a single context vector sᵢ(tₖ) = ¹/ₙ₊₁∑ⁿᵥ₌₀εᵢᵥ(tₖ) ∈ ℝˢ. A subsequent (iii) controller ANN, f⁽ᶜ⁾(.), potentially with recurrent feedback connections, eventually outputs the cell's action, aᵢ(tₖ) = fᵨ(Nᵢ(tₖ)) = f⁽ᶜ⁾(sᵢ(tₖ)) based on the cell-specific context vector sᵢ(tₖ). Notably, for the controller module we here utilize architectures [30] that are inspired by a combination of Recurrent ANNs (RNNs) [76] and Gene Regulatory Networks [77] (see Appendix A in Ref. [30] for details).

[PAGE 9] Analogous to Ref. [30], we model morphogenesis by employing NCAs on a two-dimensional
Nx × Ny square grid with the objective that all cells of the grid assume a cell-specific predefined target
cell type, ĝi, after a fixed number of tp developmental time steps, starting from an initial cell state
configuration c₁(0). We assign the first Ng elements, gi(tk) = (Ci1(tk),..., CiNG (tk)), of an NCA's
Nc-dimensional cell state ci(tk) = (Ci1(tk),..., CiNc (tk)) as indicators for expressing one of 1, ..., NG
discrete cell types, while the remaining NH = (Nc – NG) elements of the cell state represent its
hidden states, hi(tk) = (Ci(NC-NH) (tk),..., Cinc (tk)), that can be utilized by the NCA for intercellular
communication. A cell's “type”, gi(tk), is now defined as the index, 1, . . ., NG, of the maximum element
of its indicator vector gi(tk):
gi(tk) = arg max(gi(tk)).
gERNG
(2)
For an NCA to assemble a predefined target pattern of Nj = Nx × Ny target cell types ĝ =
{81,..., ÎN; }, we thus need to find a suitable set of NCA parameters that minimizes the deviation of all
actual cell types gi(tp) and the desired ones ĝi after tŋ developmental time steps. Below, we introduce
an evolutionary algorithms to evolve suitable sets of NCA parameters that maximize a fitness score
based on comparing the "final" cell types of the NCA, gi(tp), after the developmental stage to the
predefined target cell types ĝi. In this context, the NCA parameters thus correspond to the virtual
organism's genotype, while the grid of final cell types represent the system-level phenotype that is
seen by the selection mechanism of the evolutionary process (c.f., Figure 2 (C)).
2.2. Neuroevolution of NCAs: an Evolutionary Algorithm approach to Morphogenesis
Evolutionary Algorithms (EAs) are heuristic optimization techniques designed to maintain and
optimize a set, or population, X = {x1,...,xNp }, comprising parameters or individuals, x; ∈ RX,
over successive generations in order to maximize an objective function or fitness score, r(xj) : RX →
R. Drawing inspiration from the principles of natural selection and biological life's DNA-based
reproduction mechanisms, EAs (i) predominantly select high-fitness individuals for reproduction,
and utilize (ii) crossover and (iii) mutation operations to generate new offspring by (ii) merging the
genomic material of two high-quality individuals from the current population, x₁ = xj ⊕ xk, and
(iii) occasionally mutating offspring genomes, xo → xo + §x by adding typically Gaussian noise to
the parameters; the symbol signifies a genuine merging operation of two genomes, which may
vary according to the specific EA implementation. Thus, populations of individuals are directed
towards high-fitness regions within the parameter space RX, typically across numerous generations of
successive selection and reproduction cycles (i)-(iii) [30].
Closely following our previous work [30], and in contrast to many “traditional” EA use-cases, we
here explicitly distinguish between the genotypic parameters, xj, and the corresponding phenotypic
realizations, pj. More specifically, we utilize NCAs (c.f., Section 2.1) to model the biologically inspired
developmental layer [41] in between genotypes and phenotypes, xj → pj, akin to the process of
morphogenesis: Here, a genotype, xj, corresponds to a particular realization j of an NCA's parameters,
(S)
comprising the set of initial cell states x) = {ci=(.,..,N;) (0) }; and the corresponding ANN parameters
(F)
x) = 0;, such that
X
xj = x(s) UxF) = ({c₁(0)};, θ;),
(3)
where we explicitly distinguish between structural (S) and functional (F) genes. We then employ
Equation (1) for tƉ developmental steps to successively transform the NCA's cell states from an initial
state into a “final” set of cell types {gi(tp)}; on the NCA's grid. This mature phenotype,
Pj = {gi(tp)}j,
(4)
represents a two-dimensional tissue of cells, and is the input to the fitness score based on which the
EA selects: As illustrated in Figure 2 (C), we here optimize for a fitness score in the phenotype- rather

[PAGE 10] than genotype space, r(xj) → r(pj), while still performing genetic recombination and mutation in the
genotype space.
Let's recall: our goal is to achieve morphogenesis of a two-dimensional spatial tissue of cell
types, pj, that optimally resembles a predefined target pattern, {81,..., ÎN; }, of a total of Nj cells on an
Nxx Ny square grid of an NCA. Moreover, we aim to derive a virtual organism with this capability
by modeling a biologically inspired evolutionary process with EAs to evolve a suitable set of NCA
parameters (c.f., Figure 2 (C)). Thus, we introduce our phenotype-based fitness score, r(pj), as [30]
(T)
r(pj) = (2n) – N₁) +
rn(T)-rsns),
(5)
where n) counts the number of correctly assumed cell types after tƉ developmental steps (where
8i(tp) = 8i), n) counts the number of developmental steps at which the target pattern is realized
entirely (whenever gi(tk < tp) = ĝi for all i), and n(s) n counts pairs of successive time steps, (ts, ts+1) ≤
tD, without cell type updates in the entire tissue (where gi(ts+1) = gi(ts) for all i).
Thus, we design an evolutionary process that primarily selects for NCAs that assume the correct
cell type pattern after (precisely) tƉ developmental steps and reinforces NCAs (by a factor of rī in
the fitness score) that prematurely achieve and maintain the target pattern. To avoid developmental
stagnation and increase the EA's performance, we specifically discount the fitness score of NCAs with
static behavior by rs. A fitness score of Nj = Nx × Ny indicates that the problem is solved.
Although the above framework [30] can be utilized in conjunction with any black-box evolutionary
or genetic algorithm, we found the well-established Covariance Matrix Adaptation Evolutionary
Strategy (CMA-ES) [70] to be a viable choice for our purposes.
2.3. Information-theoretic analysis: active information storage, transfer entropy and spatial entropy on the NCA
Information theory [78] offers valuable insights into the dynamics of complex systems. In order to
understand the NCA's information dynamics during aging, we used three key information-theoretic
metrics to examine the information dynamics: active information storage [72], transfer entropy [73],
and spatial entropy.
Active Information Storage (AIS) quantifies the amount of information from an agent's past that is
pertinent to predicting its future state. Specifically, AIS refers to the portion of stored information
currently utilized for determining the agent's next state [72]. Mathematically, the AIS of an agent Q is
(k)
expressed as the local mutual information between its semi-infinite past qn as k → ∞ and its next
state qn+1 at time step n + 1:
ao(n + 1) = lim log2
k→∞
p(q), 9n+1)
p(qnk))p(gn+1)
(6)
Here, a(n,k) is an approximation with history length k. The time-averaged value, weighted by
the distribution of (qt), qn+1), is denoted as AQ(k) = (ao(n,k)). In our study, we calculated the local
AIS across the states of the cells.
Transfer Entropy (TE) measures the information transferred from a source agent to a destination agent
that is not contained in the past of the destination agent. We employed the local TE concept introduced
by Lizier [72]. The local TE from a source agent Z to a destination agent Q is defined as the local
mutual information between the previous state of the source zn and the next state of the destination
agent qn+1, conditioned on the semi-infinite past of the destination qik) qu (as k → ∞):
tz→Q(n + 1) = lim log2
k→∞
p(9n+1/9k),zn)
p(9n+1/9m²)
(7)

[PAGE 11] The transfer entropy To(n,k) is the local TE averaged over time, denoted as To(k) = (to(n,k)),
where to(n,k) is an approximation with history length k. Unlike mutual information, which measures
static correlation, transfer entropy captures the dynamic, directional flow of information within the
agent network.
Spatial Entropy (SE) measures the randomness or disorder within a spatial distribution of states. It
provides insight into the complexity of spatial patterns in a system, such as an NCA with multiple
states. In our study, we compute SE by evaluating the entropy of the distribution of cell states across
the grid at each time step. Formally, the spatial entropy H at time step n is defined as:
H(n) =
Σp(s) log2 p(s)
SES
(8)
where S is the set of possible states, and p(s) is the probability of state s occurring in the grid at
time step n. This measure provides an indication of the level of unpredictability or complexity in the
spatial arrangement of cell states. In this article, we calculate the spatial entropy for the states of the
NCA across different time steps.

[PAGE 11] 3. System
Following our previous study [30], we utilize EAs to evolve NCAs to perform morphogenesis
tasks. Each cell in our NCA implementation is equipped with a gene regulatory network-inspired
recurrent ANN, conceptually substituting the intricate internal decision-making competencies of
biological cells (see Figure 2 (B) for a visualization and Appendix A in [30] for numerical details). In
other words, each cell in the NCA is equipped with an information processing pipeline that transforms
sensory input of its local environment in the NCA's grid into control instructions to regularize its own
cell type. If done in a coordinated way, these local individual cell-state updates guide the formation of
a mature system-level phenotype - in our case of a target tissue - over successive developmental steps.
More specifically, we utilize Nx × Ny = 16 × 16 cells on an NCA with fixed boundary conditions
(see Section 2.1 and Appendix C in Ref. [30]) and train it analogously to [30] via evolutionary algorithms
(see Section 2.2) to perform morphogenesis - i.e., self-orchestrated tissue growth - of a (16 × 16) smiley-
face pattern in a predefined number of tp = 35 developmental steps (see Figure 2 (C) for an illustration
of the evolutionary process).
The target tissue consists of NG = 3 distinct cell types: one cell type for the background cells, one
for the face cells, and a single cell type for the facial organs, i.e.., for the eyes and the mouth (c.f., blue-,
magenta-, and white-colored cells in Figure 2 (A)). Moreover, we allow the NCA to utilize N₁ = 1
hidden channel of its Nc = 4 cell state channels for unconstrained intercellular communication. In
cell-state updates, given by Equation (1), we utilize a noise level of c = 0.125, limit the numerical
value of the proposed action a₁(tk) to la = [-1,1], and clip the cell-states post-update ci(tk+1) to
lc = [-3,3] (see Ref. [30] for more details on our NCA implementation).
Our NCAs transform an embryonic genotype, xj, into a mature phenotype, pj, and we here
quantify an NCA's performance by evaluating the corresponding fitness score, r(pj), defined by
Equation (5) with respect to the (16 × 16) smiley-face pattern over the NCA's entire life-span of tp
developmental steps. As illustrated in Figure 3, a successfully evolved NCA maximizes the fitness
score to rmax = 256, exhibiting 16 × 16 correctly expressed cell types after tk ≥ 20 time steps, then
maintaining the target pattern until t₁ = tp (see Section 2.2 for details on the evolutionary process).
Notably, the cellular agents do not perceive any information about the current nor the final fitness
score of their corresponding NCA. The fitness score is only utilized by the EA to optimize the NCA's
parameters over evolutionary time-scales. Moreover, there is no contribution neither to the fitness
score nor to the NCA's ANN sensory inputs that would provide the system with explicit temporal
information indicating the "age" of any part of the virtual organism, or even a notion of "time" in
general. Thus, the self-orchestrated pattern formation of the here - and previously [30] - investigated

[PAGE 12] NCAs is fully driven via emergent, i.e., evolved, intercellular communication rules and intracellular
decision-making.

[PAGE 12] 4. Computational results
4.1. Impact of defects of cellular information processing at different levels during aging in a multi-scale
competency architecture
4.1.1. Aging as a loss of goal-directedness: organism learned development during evolution, not to
maintain anatomical homeostasis after development
We aimed to assess whether the self-regulatory behavior of biological systems that drive morpho-
genesis induces aging-like phenomena at long time-frames. To this end, we use NCAs evolved in silico
to model the process of morphogenesis and deploy their self-regulatory dynamics for much longer
times compared to the reproduction stage during evolution (i.e., when selected for reproduction).
We monitor and analyze the NCAs morphological integrity throughout their lifetimes and compare
such long-term morphological trajectories with biological aging. The evolutionary process described
in Sections 2.2 and 3 explicitly selects for optimal fitness scores after tƉ developmental steps, which
corresponds to the fertility age of real-world organisms. However, this implies that the behavior of an
NCA with a potentially much longer lifetime of tĄ > tp, and particularly ta ≫ tp, is not subject to
selection and may fundamentally be considered ill-defined or ambiguous.
To demonstrate this, we deploy the NCA solution that has been evolved to self-assemble a
(16 × 16) smiley-face pattern during a morphogenesis phase of tp = 35 developmental steps (c.f.,
Figure 3) for a much longer lifetime of up to ta = 1500 time steps, notably without any further
optimization considering the extended lifetime. From the results presented in Figure 4, we learn that
after an initial rapid rise in the fitness score during the developmental phase, the NCA's long-term
fitness score gradually declines, primarily due to the loss of different internal organs such as a single
or both eyes and, occasionally, the mouth. Moreover, this is not only a feature of the particular NCA
demonstrated here, but is a systematic phenomenon of the presented framework.
Thus, we argue that the biologically-ubiquitous self-regulatory behavior of a substrate's agential
parts may induce system-level dynamics that resemble the