Uncertainty minimization and pattern
recognition in Volvox carteri and V. aureus
Franz Kuchling, Isha Singh, Mridushi Daga, Susan Zec, Alexandra Kunen and
Michael Levin
Allen Discovery Center, Tufts University, Medford, MA, USA

[PAGE 1] 1. Introduction
Living organisms are good at detecting, responding to and adapting to
variable environments, not just on evolutionary time scales but also via short-
and long-term adaptive organismal behaviour. Interestingly, this does not
require brains or advanced nervous systems [1-4]. Examples of learning and
adaptive behavioural responses in aneural organisms include context-
dependent motility [5,6], stress response-triggered learning [7,8], anticipation
[8], long-range spatial decision-making [9] and associative learning [10] in a
range of microbial organisms. Even embryophytes, despite their apparent lack
of dynamic motility, possess highly complex adaptive responses through their
fast and complex internal calcium signalling patterns [11]. Similarly, in
vascular plants, synaptic adhesion domains and action potentials [12,13] yield
self-identity and recognition capabilities through their use of
plant-specific synapses in Cayratia japonica [12], and can detect acoustic
vibrations from feeding caterpillars and subsequent elicitation of chemical
defences in Arabidopsis thaliana [14]. Furthermore, the slime mould Physarum
detects material properties of its environment via pulsatile mechanosensing
and makes growth decisions based on information gleaned about objects at
long range [9]. In each of these examples, adaptation to environmental
conditions occurs through a change of organismal behaviour, or, in a broader

[PAGE 2] sense, entering a different organismal or cellular active state. These adaptations range from changes of motility (direction and
amplitude), physical properties such as chemical release (as a defence in plants), mechanical tension (which can regulate
organismal shape or orientation, especially in plants), bioelectric state (modulated calcium signalling patterns), metabolic state
(such as increased glucose consumption and biosurfactant production in response to ultrasonication in Lactobacillus plantarum
[15]) to transcriptional changes leading to the expression of proteins that help the organism to deal with its new environment
(such as heat shock proteins in high stress environments for example, and even cell identity changes in multi-cellular organ-
isms).

The question at the heart of this study is what is the fundamental basis behind the emergence of these various modes of
pattern detection that are so crucial to each form of basal cognition? Attempts to devise a unified framework for answering
this question that complies with evolutionary theory and is supported by direct experimental evidence are missing. On the one
hand, archaeological evidence as summarized by Peter Godfrey-Smith allows the recreation of a cognitive lineage in evolution
as an arms race of action and detection [16] but falls short of providing a theoretical framework that explains its principal
emergence. On the other hand, theoretical work by Terrance Deacon links goal-directed, 'teleodynamic' properties in biological
organisms to the most basic forms of statistical physics [17], but fails to provide experimentally falsifiable predictions of cellular
and organismal behaviour. Our work was hence motivated by two interrelated questions: how far down the evolutionary scale
of complexity do organisms exhibit the ability to detect novel environmental patterns, and do they have expectations that may
or may not be met? What frameworks can help us understand these capacities in novel substrates?

The ability to detect environmental patterns and distinguish them from random noise is considered a basic component of
intelligence—the inference of a general pattern from particular experiences. Such a pattern can serve as the primitive basis of
counterfactuals because the recognition of a pattern endows an organism with expectations for what should happen next before
it happens. While ubiquitous seasonal and day-night cycles provide a highly reliable environmental pattern that is constant
across generations (and thus can serve as a stable target for selection), it is unclear how much individual aneural organisms can
detect and adapt to novel and more variable patterns on much shorter time scales.

Changes in a cell's extracellular environment can affect both its current physiological states and its future states, both
physiological and genetic. An example of environmentally triggered immediate changes in current cellular active states is
seen in basic phototactic organisms, where light-induced protein conformation states coupled with changes in flagellar beating
rates result in movement towards or away from light stimuli. The short-term changes in light sensitivity and downstream
flagellar beating responsivity that are the core of this ability to orient towards light and maintain direction are referred to as
photoadaptation [18]. While the mechanisms of delayed adaptive responses of light-sensitive cells are fairly well understood in
the human visual system as being mediated through intracellular signalling coupled to transcription, translation and epigenetic
modifications, photoadaptation, especially in response to complex activation patterns, has not been well studied in simpler
phototactic organisms such as Volvox.

Work over the last decade has shown that patterned environmental stimuli that differ only in the frequency of presentation
to the organism can elicit distinct downstream signalling events and functional (behavioural) outcomes in many kinds of
cellular systems. For example, pulsatile variation of osmotic concentrations leads to severe yeast growth inhibition as a result
of frequency-specific activation and refractory relationship in the mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathway, but only
at specific frequencies of osmotic oscillation [19]. A similar phenomenon is presented by using optogenetics to dynamically
activate signalling pathways [20], where optogenetic activation of epidermal growth factor (EGF) to vary the temporal dynamics
of extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) signalling leads to temporal variation in activation pulse frequency induction of
ERK signalling that not only affects the amount of transcription and the subsequent translation of a target gene but can also
trigger transcription of different target genes [21,22]. In Volvox, simple sinusoidal light stimulation patterns have been used
to measure flagellar regulation [18], but not their effect on the overall colony behaviour and not in contrast to other types of
activation patterns necessary to fully deduce complex organismal behaviour adaption.

Physiological bottom-up models employed in the examples above require a high degree of detailed knowledge of the
underlying mechanistic biochemical pathway activation and require a high degree of experimental accessibility to those
molecular pathways to be useful, which is not always possible. Thus, here we aimed to understand these phenomena from
a top-down perspective focusing on the response of the system to patterns and information content in its environment-by
generalizing a theoretical framework of adaptive responses to dynamic inputs reminiscent of higher level information process-
ing common to many cellular systems. Using a cognitive Bayesian framework based on our earlier work [23] and that of
Karl Friston and others in the field [24-29], we can formulate a model of cellular beliefs (or predictions) that encode what
type of signals the cell expects to receive at any given point in time. These cellular beliefs encompass all the receptors and
cellular machinery currently expressed and represent the cell's best estimate of which physiological and transcriptional state
will make it the most adaptable to current and anticipated environmental effects [23,30]. Regulatory output aimed at modifying
the signalling activity could hence be interpreted as the effort to minimize uncertainties in measurements of the environment
compared with expected signalling inputs. Mechanistically, cellular expectations for input signalling activity stem from the state
of the internal signalling pathway dynamics of the cell, itself encoded by transcriptional dynamics (with changes occurring
in the range of minutes to hours) on the one hand, but also by more short-term state changes in protein conformations (e.g.
opening and closing of ion channels and activation and internalization of receptor proteins) and activity profiles (ion inflow,
propagation and available storage, such as encompassed through calcium dynamics) on the other. The ensuing transcriptional
outputs and functional changes of proteins realize a constant modification of physiological and biophysical parameters affecting
signalling transmission.

[PAGE 3] The uncertainty minimization employed by the cells as dictated by Bayesian inference [23] predicts that random (and hence
unpredictable) dynamic stimulation will elicit a stronger but less directed cellular physiological and transcriptional response
than a regular, predictable dynamic stimulation, resulting in an aversion to irregular environments and preference for more
regular ones [31]. Specifically, this idea has been developed in a rich body of work on surprise minimization [25,27,32-34],
which emphasizes the drive of living beings to continuously improve their internal models of their environments and of
themselves. These ideas are frequently discussed with respect to neural brain mechanisms; however, given the wide conserva-
tion of signalling mechanisms and algorithms across neural and non-neural cells [35,36], it becomes especially interesting to ask
whether systems with no brains, and no neurons, can likewise support expectations about the future born of pattern inference
and exhibit responses which reveal that these expectations cannot be met in random environments.


Here, we test the hypothesis that aneural organisms can display actionable pattern recognition in general and uncertainty
minimization in particular. We chose to investigate this using the photoadaptive response in two different species of the
chlorophyte green algae Volvox (V. carteri and V. aureus) as a readily measurable adaptive behaviour to an external physical
stimulus that can be varied in any temporal pattern. We simulated different light stimulation patterns (including crucially
randomized ones) in our model and tested their predictions for a variable effect on phototactic modulation in V. carteri. We
designed an experimental platform that allows us to compare Volvox phototaxis towards two distinct regimes of light stimuli
with different patterns of light pulsation, exploring mechanisms and long-term effects on the organism. We complement the
phototactic trajectories obtained from these experiments with gain-of-function drug experiments focused on shifting phototactic
biases based on both our knowledge of underlying molecular pathways and their effect on their information-processing
modalities. We furthermore also tested whether Volvox exhibit short-term memory towards past light stimuli in terms of their
phototactic paths, which would provide them with further crucial neural-like capabilities. We also tested whether Volvox's
photosynthesis would also be affected by dynamic light patterns in an attempt to detect metabolic manifestations of uncertainty
minimization in Volvox. Finally, to begin exploring the potential for training of Volvox phototaxis to desired light pattern biases,
we examined whether patterned electric shocks could manipulate Volvox responses to patterned light stimuli. Taken together,
our study aims to reveal capacities that would not normally be expected in algae and provide a proof-of-concept for searching
for such capacities in a wide range of minimal and synthetic model systems that not only links existing theories of basal
cognition to experimental evidence but crucially provides us with a testable behavioural directive of simple organisms and cells
(uncertainty minimization) that can be applied to yield novel methods of intervention from medicine to ecology.

[PAGE 3] 2. Methods

[PAGE 3] 2.1. Culture conditions and strains
Volvox carteri eve strain (female) was obtained from Bradley J. S. C. Olsen Lab and grown in standard Volvox media (SVM), while
V. aureus was obtained from Carolina (catalogue number 152655) and cultured exclusively in AlgaGro®. Both strains are
incubated in a Peltier cooled incubator (catalogue number 3915FL) at 30°C under a 14 h light and 10 h dark cycle [37]. A
75 W light-emitting diode (LED) Grow Panel (model number HY-MD-D169-S-75W-RB-US) was used inside the incubator to
maintain the light and dark cycles. SVM media is prepped following a previously tested recipe by the Olson Lab (2017).
AlgaGro® medium is purchased in 50× concentrate from Carolina (catalogue number 153758) and diluted in Poland Spring
water per instructions from the manufacturer. Every time new Volvox are used for experiments, the entire culture flask is gently
mixed and placed in front of a light source for at least 5 min to allow active Volvox to move to one side of the flask for easy
collection of 1-2 ml of between 500 and 2000 viable Volvox colonies.

[PAGE 3] 2.2. Light-stimulation apparatus and imaging
Initial experiments with V. aureus were done in ABS plastic chambers printed by a fused deposition modelling (FDM) three-
dimensional printer, with clear polystyrene plastic glued to the sides for light access.
Light stimulation was achieved using standard through hole blue LEDs (from Mouser Electronics, catalogue number
630-HLMP-CB1A-XY0DD) with a wavelength of 470 nm and an opening angle of 15°, controlled with an LED driver from
Thorlabs (part number: LEDD1B), dialled to power output 1 mm from the LED of 2 mW. To calibrate the LEDs to equal outputs,
LEDs were pre-sorted to similar outputs and then soldered into a parallel circuit with a potentiometer in series with every
individual LED. Then, light intensity was measured using a photometer probe from Thorlabs (part number: PM130D) at two
distances, right at the LED and at 6 cm away from it, after which the angle of the LED and the resistance of the potentiometer
were adjusted to achieve a good match of intensities from row to row, as well as from side to side.
Quantification in this set-up was achieved through a collection of V. aureus colonies in the different sections with subsequent
manual counting using still images of the collected colony ensembles. Plots of phototactic biases using the set-up shown in
figure 1 only consider the approximate position of V. aureus in the end sections of the chambers that show a more pronounced
bias due to the length of the chamber when compared with the second set-up shown in figure 2, which allows for less
swimming back and forth.
All light experiments performed on V. carteri used SK9822 individually addressable RGB LEDs with total light outputs above
the LED at 2 mW each. Light patterns were programmed using Arduino Nano Controllers (code available at https://github.com/
Fw-Franz/Volvox). Housings for adaptive cultures were printed with ventilation holes reaching from underneath upwards
between LEDs and culture flasks to aid in heat distribution. Phototactic experiments were performed with only the blue light
from the LED at 460 nm, while growth experiments and oxygen measurements were performed at both blue and red (650 nm)
light to match incubator conditions.

[PAGE 4] Using the MCAM Gigapixel Multi-Camera array of 24 cameras, up to 48 individual chambers (two per camera) can be
observed at high spatio-temporal resolution simultaneously with individual light pattern stimulation for each chamber.
Three-dimensional printed clear dual chambers with an optically opaque divider inserted between the two chamber halves
to reduce light contamination from the sides are inserted into the device for experiments with V. carteri and are removable.
Autofluorescence of V. carteri was detected at a peak wavelength of 695 nm using a near IR long pass filter with a pass-through
wavelength of 685 nm, where the excitation light was the blue light from the LED light at 460 nm. Prior to phototactic
experiments in the MCAM camera array, V. carteri were dark adapted for at least 2 min.


[PAGE 4] 2.3. Computational tracking and analysis
To analyse the movement of V. carteri, a Python (v. 3.10) program was created that utilizes the trackpy library (version
0.4.2, https://soft-matter.github.io/trackpy/v0.4.2/) to track the particle trajectories. The program takes in multiple parameters
including, but not limited to, the following: size, speed and integrated light intensity of each V. carteri colony, x and y midpoints
of the chamber and the number of V. carteri colonies. Additionally, the program can adjust for V. carteri that are stationary
during most of the tracking, so that they can be counted separately for further analysis or excluded in the counting analysis
to remove V. carteri that are stuck to a surface due to their flagella getting caught to imperfections on the chamber surface.
As these imperfections have been reduced heavily by sanding and clear coating of the chambers, this only applies to a small
proportion of V. carteri and no bias towards different light patterns was observed, as the mechanism is unrelated to the light. The
program then takes the filtered information and determines the precise position within each chamber of each V. carteri colony
in each time frame. As photo biases did not change drastically over time, we used the average position over the duration of the
experiment for statistics and plotting.

[PAGE 5] 2.4. Simulations of cellular photoadaptation in V. carteri
Simulations of cellular photoadaption in V. carteri in response to different light patterns employ the empirically determined
model developed by Drescher et al. [18]. While we refer to their work for more detail on the model, we proceed to provide a
short summary of our implementation of their model.
The model by Drescher et al. is centred around a system of coupled differential equations governing the photoresponse of
individual flagella pairs on the surface of V. carteri colony spheres, which are of the form

$dp/dt = (s-h)H(s-h) - P/T_r$

$dh/dt = (s-h)/T_a$  (2.1)

where s(t) is the dimensionless light stimulus with s∈ [0,1], p(t) is the photoresponse variable that correlates with light
activation, h(t) is a photoadaptation variable representing the hidden biochemistry, H is the Heaviside step function that ensures
a reduction in light cannot increase flagellar beating above base levels and finally $T_a$ and $T_r$ are the adaptive and response time
constants governing the temporal aspects of photoadaptation.
From this, the measurable fluid speed u generated by the flagella pairs just above the surface of the colony is calculated by
solving the pair of differential equations above using the function solve_ivp from Python package scipy.integrate, with

$u = (1 – \beta p)$, (2.2)

where $u_0$ is the base fluid speed (experimentally determined by Drescher et al. at 81 µm s¯¹) and β > 0 quantifies the amplitude
of decrease in fluid speed in response to light, which varies across the colony surface, but is set to 1 in our calculations for
simplicity without loss of generality.

[PAGE 5] 2.5. Electric shock treatment

[PAGE 5] 2.5.1. Chamber configuration
A three-dimensional printed 30 × 20 × 2 mm chamber as shown in figure 3 was resin printed. A platinum iridium wire (catalogue
number AA10056BS) electrodes of 0.5 mm (diameter) were inserted through holes printed on either side of the chamber
allowing 1 mm of the electrode to be exposed within the active area of the chamber. An additional chamber stage was printed
to act as a holder for a strip of LED lights. The lights were controlled through an Arduino microcontroller, with programs
determining the intensity of light.

[PAGE 5] 2.5.2. Voltage and current control
Current was delivered using an LED driver (part number LEDD1B), the current limit was set at 0.2 A and dialled until the
voltage in the chamber was measured at the desired level of 3 V, then balanced with resistors in parallel to lower the actual
current going through the chamber to non-destructive levels. Measurements were done using a multimeter. An Arduino Nano
microcontroller was used to modulate the current. Fixed pulse current was delivered at 1 Hz frequency, and the same random
pulse pattern was used for the random light pulse sequences.

[PAGE 5] 2.6. Long-term light pattern treatments and oxygen measurements
Long-term light pattern exposure of V. carteri was achieved in dome-shaped three-dimensional printed devices with inbuilt
LEDs and ventilation holes on the bottom, and open space towards the top of the culture flask, but shielding the culture flasks
from the rest of the incubator lights during treatment. For the long-term experiments, a V. carteri culture was expanded into
four cultures, one of which was kept under normal incubator conditions, while the remaining three were inserted into the
aforementioned dome device under the same fixed 1 Hz, random and continuous light patterns as used in the phototactic
experiments. Overall LED output was set to the same level as the incubator lights using the photometer from above. These V.
carteri cultures alone were grown in the AlgaGro® for increased stability.
For measurements of oxygen production of V. carteri in response to light, we used the Firesting o2® apparatus from
pyrotechnics, which measures oxygen concentration in a vial in gaseous or aqueous form by scanning an oxygen-sensitive
sensor spot inside the glass vial from the outside with an optical fibre probe. Volvox carteri cultures were expanded 2 days
before the start of treatment into four flasks of 200 ml each, then, before the start of treatment, combined in a conical tube,
gently inverted to thoroughly mix the cultures and then separated into four new flasks. One was left as control in the incubator,
while the other three were exposed to light in the dome-shaped three-dimensional printed devices described above. Oxygen
measurements were taken before treatment, and then after 6, 24, 30 and 48 h, respectively, by slowly and gently swirling each
flask to mix the media but not to agitate and add more oxygen, then gently and extremely slowly transferring 5 ml using a
Pasteur pipette of one culture into the oxygen measurement vial with a temperature probe in it for temperature compensation
of oxygen concentration measurement.

[PAGE 6] 3. Results

[PAGE 6] 3.1. Volvox distinguish between patterned and random light stimuli
To investigate the ability of Volvox, starting with V. aureus, to detect and differentially react to temporal light patterns, we
designed three-dimensional printed chambers of different sizes, consisting of isolated channels with clear ends, each end
illuminated by a separately microcontrolled LED, with manual counting (figure 1) and camera-based tracking (figure 2). Based
on our central hypothesis of surprise minimization in aneural organisms, we tested the prediction that a phototactic organism
such as V. aureus would reveal a preference for order (or a dislike of unpredictability) by preferentially moving towards light
stimulation patterns of higher regularity (and hence predictability). When we exposed V. aureus to an overall equal amount
of light over time but at a regular, fixed light pulse interval versus a randomized, irregular light pattern (see figure 4), a
significantly larger proportion of V. aureus were detected in the section adjacent to the fixed interval stimulation than in the
section adjacent to the random stimulation (p < 0.05, Wilcoxon signed-rank test), in accordance with our predictions based on
uncertainty minimization.
Because of this observed preferential movement of V. aureus to the regular 1 Hz light pattern when opposed with a random-
ized light pulse pattern of similar average pulse length, we conclude that V. aureus can distinguish patterned light stimuli from
random ones, a fundamental building block for intelligent information processing [38,39].
To minimize sources of error and bias from manually counting Volvox and to get real-time data on Volvox photoadaptation for
downstream data mining, we also designed and tested a system that combines highly transparent smaller chambers (reducing
the effect of light scattering) with a high-resolution camera system. For this system, we chose exclusively V. carteri, as we have a
more detailed understanding of its photoadaptive mechanism on which we can rely to interpret the tracking data gained from
our experiments using this set-up. We used this apparatus to test the same hypothesis on another species of Volvox, V. carteri,
which is evolutionarily distant from V. aureus by an estimated 75 Myr [40].
Our results in this automated platform show that, as for V. aureus, V. carteri also exhibits a photoadaptive bias towards a
regular light pulse pattern versus a random one (see figure 4a), as over time, more V. carteri swam closer to the patterned
stimulus side than to the randomized stimulus side (p < 0.01). From this, we conclude that despite the physiological difference
between both species, the phototactic biased behaviour predicted by uncertainty minimization was present in both species,
which constitutes strong evidence for uncertainty minimization as ubiquitous behavioural directive in aneural organisms.
We exploited the detailed quantitative nature of this imaging apparatus to investigate the influence of V. carteri colony
size (µm), swimming speed (µm s¯¹), and the number of colonies inside the chamber on its phototactic bias using a principal
component analysis (PCA), where the range of these variables was 138-171 µm, 71-670 µm s¯¹ and 8–38 respectively, rounded
to the nearest integer. A graphical representation of the distribution of those three variables can be found in electronic

[PAGE 7] supplementary material, figure S1. The PCA revealed that the first two principal components accounted for 91.07% of the total
variance in the data, with PC1 explaining 56.72% and PC2 explaining 34.35%. The third component, PC3, accounted for the
remaining 8.94% of the variance. The component loadings for each variable are presented in table 1.
The strong positive loading for both V. carteri colony size and swimming speed in PC1 suggests a robust positive correlation
between these two variables, indicating that larger V. carteri colonies tend to swim at higher speeds in our system. This
relationship could be attributed to the increased propulsive force generated by larger colonies with more flagellated cells.
The strong negative loading for the number of colonies per frame in PC2 suggests that this component appears to represent
colony density, largely independent of size and speed. The moderate negative loading for speed on this component suggests
a slight tendency for lower swimming speeds in frames with higher colony counts, possibly due to increased hydrodynamic
or direct flagellar interactions, leading to V. carteri colonies getting stuck to each other temporarily. PC3, while only explaining
8.94% of the variance, revealed an interesting contrast between colony size and swimming speed. This minor component might
capture exceptions to the main trend, possibly representing scenarios where larger colonies move more slowly or smaller
colonies move more quickly and could be related to variations in colony morphology, flagellar activity or local environmental
conditions.
The high cumulative variance explained by PC1 and PC2 (91.07%) indicates that the three-dimensional data can be effectively
represented in two dimensions with minimal loss of information. This suggests a strong underlying structure in the V. carteri
population dynamics, primarily driven by the size-speed relationship and variations in colony density.
Based on this analysis, we filtered V. carteri by size (colony diameter between 120 and 150 µm) and swimming speeds (larger
than 120 µm s¯¹) in the analysis of the trajectories for higher uniformity and standardization of our data. Thus, the most effective
distinction between the random and patterned stimuli was being carried out by V. carteri of that size and swimming speed.


[PAGE 8] 3.2. Volvox show optimal photoadaptation to specific frequencies
We next examined which light pulse frequencies, if any, Volvox most readily adapt to—by exposing Volvox inside the channel to
different light pulse frequencies on each side of the chamber. Using first the manual tracking set-up with V. aureus, we tested
various pulse frequencies from 50 to 1 Hz and determined the per cent of V. aureus that swam to each end of the chamber (see
figure 5). There was a clear preferential adaptive response to light pulse frequencies of 2 Hz when opposed to smaller and larger
pulse frequencies, respectively (p < 0.001 as determined by Wilcoxon signed-rank test). From this, we conclude that V. aureus
distinguish different regular patterns in terms of their adaptive, phototactic response.
Using the automated tracking apparatus, we also tested the presence of phototactic biases in V. carteri for the highly
significant case of 1 Hz versus 2 Hz in V. aureus. However, unlike in V. aureus (see figure 5), in V. carteri there was no
difference between photoadaptive responses to either opposing light stimuli of 1 and 2 Hz, respectively. We only compared two
frequencies, so it is very possible that photoadaptation in V. carteri is optimized to a different frequency range than in V. aureus,
possibly due to slightly different flagellar response times, overall rotational speed or resonant tuning of the two compared with
V. aureus. These differences would need to be investigated in future studies, as no such detailed studies have been done on V.
aureus. Note that flagellar beating frequencies in V. carteri have been previously determined to average at 39.3 Hz [41], much
higher than the light pulse stimulation frequencies used in the experiments here, and are hence unlikely to have influenced
phototactic biases in our experiments, as they are too fast to interact with the experimental stimulation.
The data from §3.1 on the patterned versus randomized light sequences, combined with these data on different light pulse
frequencies in two similarly simple aneural species, support the hypothesis that even aneural organisms can detect patterns
and tend to avoid random stimulation patterns precisely because of the difference in overall predictability of those stimulation
patterns, and not just due to differences in frequency.

[PAGE 8] 3.3. Simulation using a cellular scale in silico model of V. carteri response to random versus patterned inputs predicts
that uncertain inputs decrease photoadaptation
In order to probe how uncertainty minimization is implemented mechanistically on the level of individual somatic cells that
biochemically implement the photoresponse, we built on work by Drescher et al. [18], who measured fluid speeds in the
vicinity of individual somatic cells in response to light activation as a measure of flagellar beating modulation to construct
their photoadaptive model, to simulate the adaptive phototactic response of V. carteri to the same types of input used in our
experimental system above (figures 1 and 2).
We simulated fluid speed changes caused by flagellum beating speed downregulation in response to inputs reflecting
fixed 1 and 2 Hz versus randomized light pulse stimulations with similar average interval lengths and equal total light
exposure. The average adaptive, or recovery time (the time it takes for a flagellum to return to baseline beating frequency after
photostimulation), obtained for the irregular, randomized light input series was increased (see figure 6e) compared with the
fixed pulse sequence (figure 6c). Not only did the average fluid speed return to lower base levels for the random sequence
compared with the fixed treatment but there was also a much higher variation around its mean recovery, which is likely to
contribute to interfere with overall photoadaptation on the organismal level, as that noise further decouples adaptive time from
the colony rotation period.
Given the ubiquity of Poisson-distributed neuronal activation patterns in neural organisms [42], we confirmed that when we
randomized inputs by shuffling stimulation pulses (which constrained each stimulation to yield similar average pulse duration
and equal total light exposure), the histogram of inter-pulse durations exhibited a Poisson distribution (see figure 6f).
Interestingly, this is the distribution most used to model natural pulsed stimulation patterns in human brains [42] to avoid
adaptation through habituation to repeated stimuli. As seen below, this opens up research on short-term adaption in Volvox
as a foundation for learning, as Poisson-type stimulation patterns have been shown to evoke distinct spike timing-dependent
plasticity (STDP) in neurons [43]. In other words, neural systems react very differently to purely random Poisson-distributed
spike trains versus tightly regulated, repeatable activation patterns, the balance thereof being an active source for debate and
probably varies in different neuronal systems depending on how tightly information is compressed at each level [44,45].
Since the ability of V. carteri to maintain directionality in phototaxis is immensely time-constrained by their rotational
frequency (which is colony size dependent and falls between 0.5 and 3 rad s¯¹ for colonies between 100 and 200 µm diameter
and is closely matched with the photoresponse [18]), we can hypothesize that a Poisson-distributed light stimulation pattern

[PAGE 9] will interfere with their ability to maintain their direction. This is because, by decreasing calcium signalling, such randomized
activation patterns would effectively decouple colony rotation from photoactivation, whose evolved interdependency is at the
heart of how V. carteri maintain phototactic direction in the first place. Interestingly, this tuning of flagellar adaptation time to
rotational frequency has also been demonstrated in Chlamydomonas and Gonium, related Volvocales genera, demarking it as an
important evolutionary conserved feature [46,47].
Note that while we did not model three-dimensional movement of V. carteri in these simulations, their relatively slow
average upward swimming speed of 274 µms¹ and max fluid speeds of 400 µms¹ [41] compared with the ratio of
chamber length (2 and 10 cm for the imaging and manual counting set-up, respectively) and light pulse frequencies mean
that the effect of colony displacement on light amplitude changes can be considered negligible compared with rotational
frequencies.

[PAGE 11] 3.4. Temporal selectivity of V. carteri photoadaptation is altered by a calcium channel blocker targeting primarily
internal calcium channels
We next investigated the mechanism underlying the temporal preferences we observed in phototactic outcomes both in silico
and in vivo.
First, we characterized how components integral to the modularity of the adaptive photoresponse (i.e. light activation and
recovery time of downregulated flagellar beating speed) are implemented in V. carteri. While initial calcium currents upon light
activation peak between 1 and 25 ms depending on the stimulation light intensity in this organism [48], far outside the regime
of rotational time periods (approx. 2-12 s) and flagellar beating modulation (approx. 50-400 ms), its diffusion across the flagella
has been estimated to take an average of 200 ms [18], which is in the same order of magnitude as flagellar beating modulation,
with response times $T_r$ around 200 ms for normal light intensities [18]. We used nimodipine, a reagent commonly used to
selectively inhibit calcium signalling [49,50], which was previously shown in the close V. carteri relative Chlamydomonas, to bind
to a calcium inhibitor binding protein localized primarily in the cell-internal membrane [51].
This enabled us to observe the adaptive response of V. carteri to light inputs in real time during the inhibition of signalling
from the photoreceptor to the flagella (figure 7). As blocking calcium this way slows down the calcium-mediated signal
progression from photoreceptor towards flagella, thereby causing a decrease in phototactic sensitivity [51], we can describe this
effect in V. carteri as an increase in the photoresponse time $T_r$ introduced earlier.
Note that we shifted the speed filtering criteria for nimodipine containing media for lower speeds, as nimodipine also
reduced overall maximum speeds as a consequence of lowered phototactic sensitivity (see electronic supplementary material,
figure S2).
We tested whether such a decrease in internal calcium flow rates causes a shift in the frequency dependence of phototactic
preference. We found that in the presence of nimodipine, V. carteri showed a significant phototactic bias towards the 2 Hz
stimulus compared with the 1 Hz, while preference for the 1 Hz regular stimulus compared with the random pulse sequence
reversed. Based on these results and the known mechanism of action of nimodipine as a calcium channel blocker interfering
with internal calcium flow in Volvocales, we have hence shown that calcium signalling is required for maintaining the temporal
fidelity of photoadaptation and that inhibiting it partially decouples the photo-induced, calcium-mediated flagellar modulation
from colony rotation as phototactic biases towards set frequencies or patterns were shifted in our experiments.
To further elucidate this phenomenon, we turned back to the simulations from §3.3 and simulated the fluid speed induced
by flagellar beating in response to the same 2 Hz frequency as before under the effect of nimodipine. Nimodipine, through
its mode as a calcium channel blocker, reduces calcium flow into the flagella and hence the speed of information flow from
photoreceptor to flagellar that determines its photoresponse time, so we increased the response time in the simulation of
photoadaptation $T_r$ by a somewhat arbitrary factor of 5. Its exact value would need experimental validation through high-speed
imaging of flagellar activity and fluid flow in response to the drug at different doses, but the choice was motivated by calcium
uptake being accelerated fivefold in normal light activation in Chlamydomonas [51]. While this means our simulations here
cannot confirm the exact behaviour of the dose of nimodipine employed, we believe it illustrated the general mode of action in
our model at this chosen translated drug dose. We found that while the overall exponential fit was not too different from figure
6e, the decreased response time reduces the overall amplitude of variation over the mean fluid response, making it more similar
in shape to the regular step function. This corresponds to shifting the high-frequency light above a flicker fusion frequency
(the rate at which photoreceptor responses no longer discriminate between intermittent light pulses) in V. carteri photodetection.
While the