A Chemical Genetics Approach Reveals
H,K-ATPase-Mediated Membrane Voltage
Is Required for Planarian Head Regeneration

SUMMARY
Biophysical signaling is required for both embryonic
polarity and regenerative outgrowth. Exploiting
endogenous ion transport for regenerative therapies
will require direct regulation of membrane voltage.
Here, we develop a pharmacological method to
target ion transporters, uncovering a role for
membrane voltage as a key regulator of anterior
polarity in regenerating planaria. Utilizing the highly
specific inhibitor, SCH-28080, our data reveal that
H+,K+-ATPase-mediated membrane depolarization
is essential for anterior gene expression and brain
induction. H+,K+-ATPase-independent manipulation
of membrane potential with ivermectin confirms
that depolarization drives head formation, even
at posterior-facing wounds. Using this chemical
genetics approach, we demonstrate that membrane
voltage controls head-versus-tail identity during
planarian regeneration. Our data suggest well-char-
acterized drugs (already approved for human use)
might be exploited to control adult stem cell-driven
pattern formation during the regeneration of complex
structures.

[PAGE 1] INTRODUCTION
Developing regenerative therapies for limb injuries and organ
replacement requires we understand not only the processes
that induce stem cell proliferation and new tissue growth, but
also the complex machinery that properly aligns new tissues
with the original polarity. This machinery must integrate adult
stem cell behavior with the morphogenesis required to replace
only the missing tissue. The planarian model system is perfectly
suited for such investigations, possessing the ability to regen-
erate any lost or damaged tissues. They have a complex central
nervous system (CNS) with a true brain (Sarnat and Netsky,
1985), a well-defined adult stem cell population comprising
roughly 30% of all cells, a clear anterior-posterior (A/P) polarity
that is maintained during regeneration, and over a hundred years
of regenerative analyses under a wide variety of conditions (Red-
dien and Sanchez Alvarado, 2004; Forsthoefel and Newmark,
2009; Salo et al., 2009). Moreover, planarians share more genes
in common with vertebrates than either Drosophila or C. elegans
(Sanchez Alvarado et al., 2002).

Certain molecular methods, such as transgenesis, still remain
to be perfected for planaria. However, as a model system for
pharmacological studies they have proved exceptional (Oviedo
and Levin, 2008; Pagán et al., 2008). Developing chemical
approaches to disease treatment is essential as a much-needed
alternative to gene therapy in which targeted delivery in human
patients is problematic. Chemical genetics (CG), the application
of bioactive small molecules to alter protein activity (Yeh and
Crews, 2003; Smukste and Stockwell, 2005; Wheeler and
Brandli, 2009), is an especially powerful tool for probing the
role of biophysical processes (Adams and Levin, 2006a). Along-
side the rapid action potentials of excitable cells, and the calcium
waves that initiate development (Ducibella et al., 2006), there op-
erate a complex network of long-term, steady-state membrane
voltage gradients and ion flows (Forrester et al., 2007; Levin,
2007). These long-range bioelectrical signals are essential for
regenerative outgrowth, regulating cell proliferation, differentia-
tion, and migration (Blackiston et al., 2009; Levin, 2009; McCaig
et al., 2009). Biophysical regulation of polarity and regeneration
is of special interest, since the well-characterized drugs that
exist for manipulating most ion transporters offer the possibility
of quick translation into therapies. However, we do not yet
understand the role of biophysical signals in influencing polarity
and mediating in vivo stem cell behavior.

Using CG, we uncovered a role for biophysical signaling during
adult stem cell-mediated regeneration in planarians. As part of
a CG screen (Nogi et al., 2005), we identified the H,K-ATPase
as a candidate for regulating regenerative A/P polarity. A P2C
class plasma membrane ATPase best known for regulating
stomach pH, the H,K-ATPase is also important in many other
tissues (Jaisser and Beggah, 1999). The H,K-ATPase is electro-
neutral, transferring one H+ ion out of, and one K+ ion into, the cell
where it is expressed. However, it can work in tandem with the K+
efflux channels KCNQ1/KCNE2 (Lambrecht et al., 2005; Shin
et al., 2009) and KCNJ10 (Kir4.1, Fujita et al., 2002; Shibata
et al., 2006) to control membrane voltage, as it does in both
the adult mammalian gut and inner ear (Shibata et al., 2006;
Kaufhold et al., 2008) and in Xenopus embryonic left/right
patterning (Aw et al., 2008; Morokuma et al., 2008a).

Like humans, planarians have multiple H,K-ATPase genes; the
Schmidtea mediterranea planarian genome (Robb et al., 2008)
contains at least seven potential H,K-ATPase genes (the genome
of the Dugesia japonica used here has not been sequenced).
Functional redundancies mean single gene knockdowns with
RNA interference (RNAi) are unlikely to produce informative
phenotypes. For instance, RNAi against the one nongastric
H,K-ATPase alpha subunit identified in D. japonica (which is ex-
pressed ubiquitously in intact worms and at the dorsal-ventral
border of the anterior wound in regenerates; Nogi et al., 2005)
produced no effect. While RNAi of two to three genes together
has been reported (Rink et al., 2009; Oviedo et al., 2010), RNAi
is not practical for simultaneous inhibition of greater numbers.
It was also important to consider the development of drug-based
strategies for future biomedical use. Therefore, a pharmacolog-
ical approach was an ideal method for loss-of-function studies,
to ask whether H, K-ATPase activity was involved in regenera-
tion, as well as gain-of-function approaches to explore biophys-
ical modulation of regenerative patterning at the plasma-
membrane level. We chose to use D. japonica, as the asexual
strain of S. mediterranea are much less tolerant of chemical
exposure (high toxicity), and the larger D. japonica are more
amenable to complex amputation assays.

The experiments revealed an exciting new regulator of anterior
polarity during planarian regeneration-membrane voltage. Our
data show that H,K-ATPase activity is required for depolarization
of the regenerating anterior blastema, anterior gene expression,
and head formation. H,K-ATPase-independent modulation of
membrane potential (via chloride flux) demonstrated that depo-
larization itself is sufficient to drive ectopic anterior regeneration
(even in posterior blastemas), highlighting membrane voltage as
a key initiator of head formation during regeneration.


[PAGE 2] RESULTS
H,K-ATPase Activity Is Required to Regenerate Head
SCH-28080 (SCH) was identified in a CG screen to uncover roles
for ion transport during regeneration. The 1,2-a-imidazopyridine
SCH is a specific, potent, and reversible
inhibitor of the H,K-ATPase that does
not inhibit the closely related Na, K-
ATPase (Lyu and Farley, 1997; Vagin
et al., 2002) and blocks invertebrate
H,K-ATPases (Klaassen et al., 1997;
Mukherjee et al., 2001; Hibino et al.,
2006). Previous investigation of the H,K-
ATPase in planarians reported exposure
to 70 µM SCH resulted in abnormal and/
or deficient anterior regeneration, specif-
ically in eye formation (Nogi et al., 2005).
Many other pharmacological blockers
were tested and found to have no effect
on anterior regeneration, while two other
H,K-ATPase inhibitors (omeprazole and prodigiosin) induced
similar anterior defects (Nogi et al., 2005). This suggested H,K-
ATPase activity specifically may be required for normal head
regeneration.

Using freshly reconstituted solutions, a significantly lower SCH
concentration (18 µM) results in planarian fragments that
regenerate normally following amputation but do not form head
structures (Figure 1). pH analyses confirm that SCH-treated
fragments are more acidic (as expected if H+ efflux is blocked),
suggesting H,K-ATPase activity has been targeted (see Figure S1
available online). Modulation of extracellular medium pH (pH = 4,
n = 50; or pH = 9, n = 60) was not sufficient to affect regenerative
polarity. As previously shown, SCH had no effect on intact
worms (Nogi et al., 2005), ruling out toxicity or inhibition of
stem cell maintenance. Transverse worm fragments were ampu-
tated so that both head and tail regeneration could be assayed in
the same regenerate. Importantly, SCH-treated regenerates
formed anterior blastemas (Figure S2), suggesting H,K-ATPase
activity is not required for stem cell proliferation or wound heal-
ing. Additionally, SCH treatment did not induce lesions or
necrosis associated with toxicity in regenerating fragments.

H,K-ATPase inhibition during the first 72 hr of regeneration
blocked regeneration of head structures in posterior fragments
(Figures 1A-1C). Exposure yielded some cyclopic (reduced
anterior) animals, while most regenerates lacked any visible
anterior structures producing a "headless" phenotype
(Figure 1D). Even after 2 months, H,K-ATPase-inhibited worms
remained headless. Treatment for <72 hr resulted in a dose
response effect (where cyclopia increased and headless-ness
decreased), with SCH treatment for only 24 hr producing no
effect (data not shown). We conclude that H,K-ATPase activity
is required for normal anterior morphogenesis, but that
patterning mechanisms are able to recover unless inhibition is
maintained past a critical point. Based on these findings, we
choose to focus our analyses solely on pharynx fragments,
which are most affected by H,K-ATPase inhibition.

[PAGE 3] H,K-ATPase Inhibition Prevents Heads
without Duplicating Tails
While some headless worms possessed one pointed (posterior
morphology) and one rounded (nonposterior morphology) end,
most H,K-ATPase-inhibited regenerates had two pointed ends,
suggestive of a two-tailed phenotype (see Figures 1B and 1C).
To determine the true polarity, we performed molecular analyses
of tissue morphology and A/P markers (Figure 2). Surprisingly,
headless worms had a single posterior end, with the second
end neither posterior nor anterior. This could be seen in the
gastrovascular (GV) tract of H, K-ATPase-inhibited regenerates,
where the double-branched posterior morphology was present
but the single-branched anterior morphology was not (Figure 2A).
Instead, the two posterior GV branches connected around the
pharynx, but failed to extend anteriorly (Figure 2A2). Additionally,
the GV tract ectopically extended into the "ante-
rior" margin. Examination of the CNS revealed
headless worms lack cephalic ganglia and
therefore have no brain (Figure 2B). Instead,
the ventral nerve cords running along each
side ectopically connected, producing a single
nerve cord looped around the pharynx, which
retained its correct A/P polarity (Figure 2B2).
The pharynx also failed to undergo morphal-
laxis; in headless worms, the pharynx did not
recenter and shrink in relation to the fragment's
smaller size.

The region anterior to the eyes in planaria is
devoid of stem cells (neoblasts). However,
headless worms had neoblasts right up to their
"anterior" margin (Figure 2B2). Despite lacking
anterior structures, there was no duplication of
posterior markers in H,K-ATPase-inhibited
regenerates (Figure 2C). H,K-ATPase inhibition
prevented optical nerve (Figure 2D) and photo-
sensitive cell (Figure 2E) formation, corrobo-
rating morphological observations that SCH
treatment blocks eye formation. Headless
worms also failed to induce anterior genes,
such as those expressed by the sensory cells in the anterior
fringe (Figure 2F). We conclude that headless worms regenerate
tail but fail to regenerate head. Together these data reveal that
H,K-ATPase activity is required for anterior gene expression
and head morphogenesis, without affecting posterior genes or
reversing blastema polarity.

In spite of having a complete pharynx, H,K-ATPase-inhibited
regenerates did not eat even when placed directly on food
(data not shown). This is consistent with a requirement for brain
in order to feed (Sheiman et al., 2002). Similarly, although head-
less worms moved when touched by a pipette tip, they otherwise
remained stationary. This contrasts with controls, which even at
24 hr of regeneration still move about the dish. Therefore, we
performed quantitative behavioral analyses of H,K-ATPase-
inhibited planarians (Figure 3A) using a custom-made computer
vision system for tracking behavior (Hicks et al., 2006). When
placed in new environments, planarians typically undergo a
short exploration period; however, H,K-ATPase-inhibited regen-
erates completely lost exploratory behavior. At 2 weeks of

[PAGE 4] regeneration, control pharynx fragments (Figure 3A1) explored
roughly 27% of the dish, whereas comparable H,K-ATPase-
inhibited pharynx fragments (Figure 3A2) explored 0% (Fig-
ure 3A3, p = 0.0015). In comparison, regenerates lacking mature
brains, such as 24 hr untreated pharynx fragments, move signif-
icantly more than 2-week-old H,K-ATPase-inhibited regenerates
(Figure 3A3, p < 0.0001). This suggests H,K-ATPase-inhibited
worms do not process neural inputs sufficient to coordinate
exploratory behavior, which control fragments can by 24 hr of
regeneration, highlighting an early role for H,K-ATPase activity
during brain regeneration.

These data suggest H,K-ATPase activity is an initial step in
regenerating anterior structures, during or prior to the signaling
that patterns the anterior blastema. To position ion transport
relative to known molecular pathways, we investigated Wnt
signaling (Figure 3B), which regulates A/P polarity during
planarian regeneration (Kobayashi et al., 2007; Petersen and
Reddien, 2009). Inhibition of nuclear β-catenin signaling by
RNAi causes ectopic posterior head formation, producing two-
headed worms (Figure 3B3) (Gurley et al., 2008; Iglesias et al.,
2008; Petersen and Reddien, 2008; Yazawa et al., 2009; Oviedo
et al., 2010). However, H,K-ATPase inhibition prevents ectopic
head formation (Figure 3B4, p < 0.05). The inability of β-cate-
nin-RNAi to ectopically induce anterior signaling when H,K-
ATPase is also inhibited suggests H,K-ATPase activity is neces-
sary to initiate ectopic anterior signals.


[PAGE 4] Anterior Signaling Rescues H,K-ATPase Inhibition
Unlike posterior fragments, prepharyngeal fragments regenerate
heads despite SCH exposure (Figure 1D), although eye develop-
ment is delayed by several days. One possibility is that the
presence of anterior signals in this region compensates for lost
H,K-ATPase activity, inducing head regeneration despite H,K-
ATPase inhibition. To test this, increasing amounts of prepharyng-
eal tissue were amputated, allowing us to compare a gradient of
regeneration responses to SCH treatment, from regenerates retain-
ing the entire prepharynx region to those without any prepharyngeal
tissue (Figure 4A). The data reveal that as more anterior tissue is
removed, regenerates are more affected by H,K-ATPase inhibition.
This suggests the presence of anterior tissue is sufficient to rescue
anterior morphogenesis from H,K-ATPase inhibition.

To determine if the anterior CNS specifically is involved, whole
worms were cut sagittally (longitudinally) either through the
midline (anterior CNS left in both halves) (Figure 4B), or offset
to one side where most anterior CNS was left in the larger
"half" and little-to-none in the smaller "half" (Figure 4C). The

[PAGE 5] results reveal that when brain tissue is present, head formation
occurs even with H,K-ATPase inhibition (Figure 4B3). However,
when the CNS is excluded, H,K-ATPase inhibition is sufficient
to block head regeneration, resulting in headless worms (Fig-
ure 4C3). In fact, although prepharyngeal transverse fragments
are SCH resistant (Figure 1D), prepharyngeal fragments that
exclude the ventral nerve cords (CNS) become susceptible to
H,K-ATPase-inhibition (Figure 4D). This suggests it is not merely
anterior tissue, but anterior CNS specifically, that is capable of
rescuing H,K-ATPase inhibition.

These results suggest the presence of anterior signaling is
sufficient to drive head regeneration independent of H, K-ATPase
activity. If correct, reinitiating regeneration, which would resup-
ply such signaling, should also rescue head formation. There-
fore, headless regenerates (at 2-3 weeks of regeneration) were
wounded at the "anterior" end without further SCH exposure
and assayed for head regeneration (Figure 5). The data revealed
that wound healing alone was not sufficient to restore head
structures (Figure 5A). However, the presence
of an unpigmented blastema did rescue head
structures (Figures 5B and 5C). Interestingly,
smaller wounds that induced a tiny blastema
(Figure 5B3) developed cyclopia (Figure 5B4),
while large blastemas (Figure 5C3) regenerated
full heads (Figure 5C4). This perhaps reflects the
difference between a small, localized spot of
anterior gene expression and the broader
signaling provided by a larger blastema. We
conclude that wound healing alone is not
sufficient to initiate anterior morphogenesis,
but that anterior signals are provided by the
new tissue (blastema). This suggests a func-
tional difference between wound healing (driven
by tissue expansion) and true regeneration
(where blastema formation initiates extensive
patterning and tissue remodeling).

As expected, the ability to restore head structures appears to
be from regeneration-specific signaling, since in wounded
headless worms the first eye invariably arose within the blas-
tema. This rescue is not caused merely by indiscriminate
regeneration, as blastemas formed by wounds in the tail never
promoted head regeneration (100%, n = 11). Only blastema
formation in what should be the anterior end of headless worms
resulted in head regeneration. The rescue of H,K-ATPase inhi-
bition by inducing regeneration in the headless region shows
that "nonhead" (nonposterior, nonanterior) tissue is still compe-
tent to form anterior structures, provided the correct signals are
made available. This demonstrates that H,K-ATPase activity
is not involved in the initial determination of anterior polarity,
as blastemas in the headless region still know to form head
structures. Instead, the sufficiency of anterior signals to rescue
head regeneration is consistent with data showing that H,K-
ATPase activity is required for anterior gene expression up-
stream of anterior morphogenetic patterning, thus supporting