[PAGE 1] INTRODUCTION
Left-right (LR) asymmetry is a key feature of vertebrate embryogenesis [Fujinaga, 1996; Levin, 1997; Wood, 1997; Levin, 1998; Levin and Mercola, 1998]. Within the last few years, some understanding of the molecular basis for LR patterning has been gained through the characterization of a cascade of asymmetrically expressed genes in the chick [Levin et al., 1995, 1997; Isaac et al., 1997]. The most downstream member of this cascade, a TGF-ẞ family member called nodal (XNR-1 in frogs), is expressed in the left lateral plate mesoderm (LPM) of gastrulating chick, frog, and mouse embryos [Collignon et al., 1996; Lowe et al., 1996]. When misexpressed on the right, in both chick and Xenopus, this gene causes changes in the situs of the heart and other organs [Levin et al., 1997; Sampath et al., 1997].

In the chick, Sonic hedgehog (Shh) is expressed on the left side of Hensen's node, prior to the appearance of asymmetric nodal expression, in cells that are directly adjacent to cells expressing nodal [Levin et al., 1995; Levin, 1997]. Furthermore, misexpression of Shh on the right results in ectopic right-sided nodal expression and a randomization of heart situs. Likewise, abolishing Shh expression with activin bead implants [Levin et al., 1995] or anti-Shh antibodies [Pagan-Westphal and Tabin, 1988] leads to a loss of nodal expression. These data have been interpreted [Levin et al., 1995] to suggest that Shh is an inducer that lies upstream of nodal (Fig. 1A). Thus lateral plate mesoderm by default would not be expected to express nodal. The presence of Shh on the left side, itself a consequence of earlier asymmetric events, induces nodal in the left LPM, which then signals further to asymmetric organs such as the heart.

Although this model (including activin as a factor thought to be upstream of Shh) fits the chick data, it is unclear to what extent the postulated pathway upstream of nodal applies to other species. No asymmetric expression of Shh has been observed in mice [Collignon et al., 1996]. Likewise, null mutations in activin ligand do not result in a laterality phenotype [Matzuk et al., 1995]. However, activin receptor IIB null mutant mice exhibit isomerism [Oh and Li, 1997], and mice with ectopic expression of Shh do show ectopic nodal expression [C. C. Hui, personal communication].

Interestingly, Lohr et al. [1997] reported that right LPM from Xenopus embryos, when cultured in explant from st. 15, goes on to express XNR-1, the frog homolog of chick nodal. This result can be taken to imply that XNR-1 is expressed in lateral tissue as a default and that right-sided expression is normally inhibited by midline structures (Fig. 1B). This interpretation would contradict the model of the chick LR pathway; thus the frog data have interesting implications for understanding the asymmetric regulation of nodal expression. A priori, one can see at least two possible interpretations of the data that resolve this contradiction. Perhaps the pathway model needs to be modified in a way consistent with both the frog and chick data, e.g., instead of inducing nodal expression, perhaps Shh represses the expression of a midline repressor of nodal expression. Alternatively, perhaps the regulatory steps upstream of nodal asymmetry differ in frogs and birds. The latter possibility would be especially surprising given the conservation of nodal expression in several species. We explored this issue by an investigation of the fates of both chick and Xenopus explants.

[PAGE 2] MATERIALS AND METHODS
Chick Explants
All experimental manipulations were performed on standard pathogen-free white leghorn chick embryos obtained from SPAFAS (Norwich, CT). Eggs at the stage indicated were cracked into a pan containing PBS or Pannett-Compton medium. Embryos were explanted under a dissecting scope and trimmed of tissue anterior and posterior to the ends of the area pellucida. Then, the entire area to the right or left of the primitive streak was cut away and placed ventral side upward on a Costar 1 um filter (catalog #110410) floating on top of 3 ml of medium (10% Fetal Calf Serum, 2% chick extract, 1% penicillin/streptomycin, 1% L-glutamine, in Alpha-MEM medium). In the control experiment, the explant was done similarly except the node was allowed to remain with the explant. Explants were cultured at 38°C with 5% CO2 for 10-20 hours.

Chick In Situ Hybridization
Filters containing explants were transferred to 4% paraformaldehyde, and the explants were carefully detached and fixed overnight. Explants were processed for in situ hybridization in scintillation vials as previously described [Levin et al., 1995].

Chick Nodal Viral Implants
Chick embryonic fibroblast (CEF) cells were infected with the nodal virus described previously [Levin et al., 1997]. Briefly, the BMP-4 pro region (including the cleavage cite) was fused to the cNR-1 mature region and inserted into the RCAS-BP(A) vector. CEF cells infected with this virus pelleted, and the pellets were implanted between the epiblast and hypoblast on the right side of st. 5-6 embryos in New culture [New, 1955].

Xenopus Explants
Xenopus embryos obtained by standard methods were grown to st. 16 in 0.1× MMR. They were then transferred to 0.75× MMR in a dish whose bottom was covered by 1% agarose in 0.75× MMR and de-vitellin- ized by forceps under a dissecting microscope. Using a sharp pair of forceps, the embryos were cut into por- tions comprising the left and right lateral pieces and a strip of dorsal tissue including the neural plate and notochord (~3 notochord widths). All explants con- tained underlying mesoderm and endoderm. Explants were then cultured in 0.75× MMR. Explants healed in ~30 minutes.

Xenopus In Situ Hybridization
In situ hybridization was performed according to a standard protocol [Harland, 1991].

Xenopus Antibody Staining
Embryos and explants were fixed in 4% formalde- hyde in MEM salts for 1 hour. They were then dehy- drated into methanol and stored. Prior to antibody staining, explants were rehydrated into PBS, blocked with 20% sheep serum in PBST (PBS + 0.1% Triton X-100 + 2 mg/ml BSA) for 1 hour, and incubated with a 1:1,000 dilution of primary MZ15 [Salisbury and Watt, 1988] antibody overnight at 4°C. Explants were then washed 5× in PBST, and a 6th wash in PBST overnight. Secondary antibody detection was done with an anti- mouse alkaline-phosphatase conjugated antibody over- night at 1:1,500 dilution in PBST + 20% sheep serum. Explants were then washed 5× in PBST and a 6th wash in PBST overnight. Detection was done with NBT and BCIP as for in situ hybridization and lasted 1.5 hours. Explants were then fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde, washed in PBS, and scored under a dissecting scope.


[PAGE 3] RESULTS
Both Left and Right Chick Explants Express Nodal
To investigate the possible discrepancy between the model of the inductive events thought to lead up to nodal expression in chick, and the midline repression model suggested by recent experiments in Xenopus, the first set of experiments were designed to recapitulate the explant experiments of Lohr et al. [1997] in the chick. Thus we wanted to look for nodal expression in cultured lateral tissue when explanted away from the primitive streak and Hensen's node at a stage before the asymmetric expression of Shh (St. 4).

In the chick, nodal is expressed in lateral plate mesoderm [Levin et al., 1995]. Thus, in order to investi- gate nodal expression in cultured explants, it was first necessary to show that mesodermal precursors had already left the streak and were present in explanted tissue, since otherwise a negative result could be attrib- uted to lack of cells able to express nodal. It is generally believed that mesodermal precursors have already begun to ingress into lateral tissue away from the streak at stages 4 [Rosenquist, 1966; Vakaet, 1970; Nicolet, 1971; Schoenwolf et al., 1992]. To show this conclusively, at the stages at which our explants were to be made (an example is shown in Fig. 2A), we examined by wholemount in situ hybridization the expression of the chick gene Brachyury (cBra), which is a marker for mesodermal cells [Knezevic et al., 1997]. It is seen that at st. 4 cBra expression is detected at a significant distance away from the streak in whole embryos (Fig. 2B). To be sure that our explants contained mesodermal cells, explants (containing no streak or node tissue) made at st. 4 were immediately fixed and hybridized to a probe to cBra. The expression pattern shows (Fig. 2C) that such explants do indeed contain mesodermal pre- cursors.

Having established the presence of mesodermal pre- cursors in explants, it was necessary to show that they are present in sufficient abundance to provide nodal expression. Thus we made explants of left lateral tissue containing the node (which would provide the left-sided Shh signal needed to induce nodal expression), but excluding the primitive streak (the source of lateral mesodermal cells) [Psychoyos and Stern, 1996a]; this is schematized in Figure 2D. When cultured, such ex- plants go on to display nodal expression (Fig. 2E), showing that sufficient numbers of mesodermal cells have already left the streak by the time our explants were done.

We next wished to show that our culture conditions recapitulate the normal progression of events leading up to nodal induction. Thus we explanted left and right sides of a st. 6 blastoderm including the primitive streak and node and cultured these for 6 hours. When these explants were fixed and probed with a nodal probe, it was observed that, as in the intact embryo, the left side (Fig. 2F) goes on to express nodal (6 out of 7 cases, Fig. 2G), whereas the right side (Fig. 2H) does not (0 out of 10 cases, Fig. 21). Taken together, these data show that our culture system allows the induction and subsequent expression of nodal with correct sided- ness, when the midline is present.

The pathway proposed for events leading up to LR asymmetry in the chick would suggest that in the absence of a source of Shh expression (Hensen's node), nodal would not be expressed. To ask whether chick lateral tissue would express nodal when cultured in isolation from the node and streak, as has been seen in Xenopus, we explanted left and right halves of a st. 4 embryo, just adjacent to the primitive streak, and cultured these separately for 12-18 hours (Fig. 3).

Surprisingly, nodal expression was observed in 38% of left (n = 31, Fig. 3A) and 40% of right (n = 44, Fig. 3B) explants. Taking into account some attrition due to imperfect culture conditions, this result shows that lateral tissue does express nodal when isolated from the primitive streak and Hensen's node. A similar result was observed by Yuan and Schoenwolf [1998].

[PAGE 4] Chick Explants Regenerate a Node and Notochord Without Correct LR Pattern
The expression of nodal in lateral tissue explanted away from Shh present in Hensen's node seemed to suggest that a modification of the chick Shh → nodal pathway model was necessary. However, it had been reported that Hensen's node and notochord can regener- ate [Yuan et al., 1995b,c; Psychoyos and Stern, 1996b; Yuan and Schoenwolf, 1998] and express several spe- cific markers. Thus we asked whether our lateral explants regenerate a source of Shh signal [Yuan and Schoenwolf, 1998] and, if so, whether its LR polarity was correct. As in the previous experiment, left and right sides of st. 4 embryos were explanted, cultured, and probed for Shh expression. Indeed, Shh expression was detected in 58% of left explants (n = 31), and in 67% of right explants (n = 34). The pattern of expres- sion ranged from a round spot or horseshoe shape similar to expression in Hensen's node of intact embryo, to an extended line of expression similar to expression in notochord tissue (Fig. 4A). In both left (Fig. 4B) and right (Fig. 4C) explants, nodal expression was detected proximal to Shh expression, as in intact embryos (see Fig. 5A). Thus we conclude that cultured lateral tissue does eventually contain midline structures and, specifi- cally, regenerates sources of Shh expression similar to the node and notochord.

In the intact embryo, Shh expression is asymmetric in Hensen's node (Fig. 4E), being expressed only on the left side. Likewise, ablated nodes in cultured embryos regenerate with proper left-right asymmetry [Psy- choyos and Stern, 1996b]. Since our right-sided ex- plants contained nodal expression, whereas normally nodal is left-sided, we asked whether the node regener- ated in explants has normal LR asymmetry. By itself, the presence of nodal expression in right explants does not prove that the regenerated node loses correct asymmetry, since it can be argued that the left half of a correctly patterned regenerating node would be ex- pected to induce nodal in the left half of the right-side explant. Thus we examined closely the expression of Shh in regenerating nodes in left and right explants. In all cases where the expression was not a straight line (corresponding to a later stage of Shh expression in notochord and floor plate, which is symmetric in intact embryos), Shh expression was seen to be symmetrical,


[PAGE 5] NODAL ASYMMETRY IN CHICK AND XENOPUS
189

NODAL ASYMMETRY IN CHICK AND XENOPUS 189

Fig. 4. Chick explants regenerate node without correct LR asymmetry. A. Left and right explants, when cultured for 10-20 hours, exhibit Shh
expression. The expression domains range from spots or horseshoes (node-type pattern) to straight lines (notochord-type pattern). B. Left and
(C) right explants express nodal adjacent to Shh expression domains. D. The regenerating Shh domain often exhibits no left-right asymmetry, in
contrast to endogenous w.t. expression (E), where Shh is expressed only on the left side of Hensen's node. F. These results are consistent with
nodal expression in lateral explants being a result of induction by newly regenerating Shh expression. Red arrowheads indicate Shh expression;
black arrowheads indicate nodal expression.

suggest that a modification of the chick Shh → nodal
pathway model was necessary. However, it had been
reported that Hensen's node and notochord can regener-
ate [Yuan et al., 1995b,c; Psychoyos and Stern, 1996b;
Yuan and Schoenwolf, 1998] and express several spe-
cific markers. Thus we asked whether our lateral
explants regenerate a source of Shh signal [Yuan and
Schoenwolf, 1998] and, if so, whether its LR polarity
was correct. As in the previous experiment, left and
right sides of st. 4 embryos were explanted, cultured,
and probed for Shh expression. Indeed, Shh expression
was detected in 58% of left explants (n = 31), and in
67% of right explants (n = 34). The pattern of expres-
sion ranged from a round spot or horseshoe shape
similar to expression in Hensen's node of intact embryo,
to an extended line of expression similar to expression
in notochord tissue (Fig. 4A). In both left (Fig. 4B) and
right (Fig. 4C) explants, nodal expression was detected
proximal to Shh expression, as in intact embryos (see
Fig. 5A). Thus we conclude that cultured lateral tissue
does eventually contain midline structures and, specifi-
cally, regenerates sources of Shh expression similar to
the node and notochord.
In the intact embryo, Shh expression is asymmetric
in Hensen's node (Fig. 4E), being expressed only on the
left side. Likewise, ablated nodes in cultured embryos
regenerate with proper left-right asymmetry [Psy-
choyos and Stern, 1996b]. Since our right-sided ex-
plants contained nodal expression, whereas normally
nodal is left-sided, we asked whether the node regener-
ated in explants has normal LR asymmetry. By itself,
the presence of nodal expression in right explants does
not prove that the regenerated node loses correct
asymmetry, since it can be argued that the left half of a
correctly patterned regenerating node would be ex-
pected to induce nodal in the left half of the right-side
explant. Thus we examined closely the expression of
Shh in regenerating nodes in left and right explants. In
all cases where the expression was not a straight line
(corresponding to a later stage of Shh expression in
notochord and floor plate, which is symmetric in intact
embryos), Shh expression was seen to be symmetrical,

190
LEVIN AND MERCOLA

Fig. 5. Nodal does not induce nodal. A. In intact embryos, there are two domains of nodal expression: a small medial domain (M arrowhead)
directly adjacent to Shh expression (S arrowhead), and a larger lateral domain some distance away (L arrowhead). B. Explants sometimes
recapitulate this pattern of expression exactly. C. To test whether the large nodal domain could result from nodal expression in the medial
domain, nodal-expressing cells were implanted on the right side of the node in st. 6 embryos. Ectopic right-sided nodal expression was never
observed outside of the nodal-expressing cell pellet (P arrowhead). D. In contrast, Shh-expressing cell pellets (positive controls) do induce ectopic
nodal domains (L arrowhead). P-Shh cell pellet.

either as a round spot or as a complete horseshoe (Fig.
4D), in contrast to the one-sided sickle shape of wild-
type expression (Fig. 4E). Taken together, these data
suggest that nodal expression in explants is due to
signaling from a regenerated node that has lost the
ability to impose proper Shh asymmetry.

Nodal Does Not Induce Nodal

Intact embryos exhibit two asymmetric domains of
nodal expression (Fig. 5A): a small domain proximal to
Shh expression in the node (green arrowhead) and a
large lateral domain (blue arrowhead). Interestingly,
lateral explants often (but not always) recapitulated
this pattern (Fig. 5B). Since nodal is a TGF-ẞ family
member and presumably represents a secreted signal-
ing molecule, we asked whether perhaps the nodal
expression of the medial domain induces the expression
of nodal within the lateral lateral tissue. Thus we
infected chick embryo fibroblast cells in culture with an
avian retrovirus containing the mature portion of the
nodal gene. Pellets of these cells were made and
implanted to the right of Hensen's node in st. 6 chick
embryos in New culture, to determine whether misex-
pression of nodal on the right was sufficient to cause
lateral tissue to express nodal. The pellets clearly
exhibit nodal signal (Fig. 5B, arrow labeled with "P"),
thus showing that the cells are making nodal mRNA.
These cell pellets are also known to make functional
nodal protein, as they have been shown to induce
reversed and symmetrical hearts in chick embryos
[Levin et al., 1997]. Following implantation of such
pellets on the right side of Hensen's node, right-sided
nodal expression was never observed to occur in the
lateral plate mesoderm (n = 9). In contrast, control
pellets infected with the Shh virus were able to induce
ectopic nodal (Fig. 5C, yellow arrow).

Xenopus Explants Regenerate Notochord

Based on the results we obtained using chick ex-
plants, our model predicted that Xenopus lateral tissue
would likewise have to regenerate an inducer of nodal
(Xnr-1) expression. In contrast, the midline repressor
model [Lohr et al., 1997] requires the absence of midline
structures in the explants. In order to test this in the
frog, we duplicated the experiments of Lohr et al. [1997]
and asked whether midline structures were regener-
ated. Left and right lateral tissue was explanted from
Xenopus embryos at st. 15/16 (Fig. 6A). Such explants
were cultured to ~st. 25 and probed for two markers of
midline structures: MZ15 [Salisbury and Watt, 1988],
an antibody that recognizes a mature notochord-
specific epitope, and Xnot, a gene expressed in the early
notochord [Dassow et al., 1993]. Since in Xenopus,
unlike in chick, it is unclear which member of the
Hedgehog family (if any) is responsible for Xnr-1 induc-
tion, we used these two different ways of identifying
notochord cells. The results obtained by each marker
were identical.

Whole embryos show stain in the notochord at st. 18
(Xnot) and at st. 26 (MZ15) (Fig. 6B,H). In contrast,
explants fixed and probed immediately after surgery
(st. 15/16) show no stain (Fig. 6C,I), showing that no
original notochord cells are included in the explants.
Tissue removed from the dorsal part of the embryo
during the surgery does express the notochord markers
(Fig. 6D,J); furthermore, it is seen that 1-2 notochord
widths separate the notochord from the lateral tissue in
our explants. This also demonstrates that lateral ex-


[PAGE 3] DISCUSSION

In this set of experiments, we attempted to differenti-
ate between two competing models of events upstream
of asymmetric nodal expression. The left-sided inducer
model [Levin et al., 1995] proposes that a left-sided
molecule (Shh, in chick) is necessary to induce nodal
expression in left lateral mesoderm. The absence of this
signal on the right is what accounts for the absence of
nodal expression in right mesoderm. Thus the meso-
derm would be considered naive tissue with respect to
nodal expression. In contrast, the intriguing experi-
ments on lateral mesoderm isolation in Xenopus [Lohr
et al., 1997] have suggested a midline repressor model,
which holds that lateral tissue is fated to express nodal
by default and that a repressor molecule secreted by the
midline is what accounts for the lack of nodal expres-
sion in the right side.

Our results show, contrary to the simplest predic-
tions from the proposed chick pathway, that chick
lateral tissue behaves like Xenopus, in that both right
and left lateral explants cultured away from the mid-
line tend to express nodal. We detected no statistically
significant differences in nodal expression between the
left and right sides, suggesting that the lateral tissue is
symmetric with respect to ability to express nodal and
that asymmetries in this gene reflect prior asymmetries
at the midline.

Importantly, we show that midline structures such as
the node and notochord are regenerated in our ex-
plants, and express Shh, confirming the previous find-
ings of Psychoyos and Stern [1996b], and Yuan et al.
[1995a] and Yuan and Schoenwolf [1998]. As in intact
embryos, nodal expression is always seen in proximity


192
LEVIN AND MERCOLA

to Shh expression in explants. Thus we propose that
nodal expression in chick lateral tissue explanted away
from the midline is due to an induction from the
regenerated node. This is likely to explain an apparent
discrepancy between our results and those of Pagan-
Westphal and Tabin [1988], who found no nodal expres-
sion in chick lateral explants done at st. 5. Our explants
were done at st. 4, which allows the node to regenerate,
whereas theirs were done at a later stage which is likely
to be less plastic. Moreover, heterochronic transplants
indicate that the ability of adjacent tissues to pattern
left-right Shh expression in grafted nodes wanes past
st. 5 [Pagan-Westphal and Tabin, 1988].

As in the case in chick, we show that Xenopus lateral
explants also regenerate notochordal cells. Thus such
explants actually contain midline signals known to
induce nodal in chick, as opposed to being isolated from
the midline, as would be required for the midline
repressor model.

Based on these data, which are consistent with all of
the chick pathway experiments [Levin, 1998] as well as
the Xenopus data [Lohr et al., 1997], we conclude that
nodal expression indeed requires an asymmetric in-
ducer generated by the midline. This model is consis-
tent with a HH protein being necessary for nodal
induction in both species and provides an explanation
for both sets of data in terms of a single conserved
mechanism upstream of nodal expression. Previous
chick data [Levin, 1998] and new data [Pagan-West-
phal and Tabin, 1988] showing that anti-Shh antibodies
specifically abolish nodal expression in chick embryos,
suggest that SHH is the endogenous nodal inducer in
chick. The specific nature of the inducer in Xenopus is
less clear, since no asymmetric Hedgehog expression
has been demonstrated in frogs. However, it is known
that misexpression of Hedgehogs in Xenopus does re-
sult in situs abnormalities [Sampath et al., 1997]; thus
it is likely that some member of the family has a similar
role in Xenopus.

The induction of nodal in explants frequently occurs
in two domains, much as in intact embryos. The induc-
tion of the distal, lateral domain of expression may be
due to signaling from the medial domain adjacent to the
Shh expression in the node. However, we show that this
signal is not mediated by nodal itself, since ectopic
nodal expressed on the right side of Hensen's node in
whole embryos does not induce ectopic lateral expres-
sion of nodal. Thus the mechanism by which asymmet-
ric Shh expression induces two separate domains of
nodal expression is unknown.

In contrast to regeneration of ablated node in whole
embryos, which happens with correct LR asymmetry of
several markers [Psychoyos and Stern, 1996b], the
node regenerated by explants seems to be unable to
express correct asymmetry in Shh expression. The
punctate and disorganized nature of the notochord that
regenerates in Xenopus explants likewise is also consis-
tent with a loss of normal asymmetry in midline
structures. Thus distal lateral halves of the embryo
need to be in contact via the midline for proper asymmet-
ric gene expression. This suggests a view of the midline
tissues as facilitating signaling necessary for asymme-
try, in contrast to the predominating view of the midline
as only an isolating barrier between the left and right
compartments [Melloy et al., 1998]. Thus the randomiza-
tion of heart situs and bilateral or aberrant expression
of XNr-1 seen following extirpation of midline
(floorplate + notochord) tissue [Danos and Yost, 1996]
might be explained by improper (ectopic) regeneration
of the midline signaling center, rather than a loss of a
barrier.


[PAGE 4] ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We thank Sylvia Pagan, Cliff Tabin, and Claudio
Stern for helpful discussions and advice on explant
culture conditions. Chick Brachyury plasmid was ob-
tained from Gerhard Herrmann. Xenopus XNot-10
plasmid was obtained from Chris Kroll.

Melloy P, Ewart J, Cohen M, Desmond M, Kuehn M, Lo C (1998): No
turning, a mouse mutation causing left-right and axial patterning
defects. Dev Biol 193:77-89.
New D (1955): A new technique for the cultivation of the chick embryo
in vitro. J Embryol Exp Morph 3:326-331.
Nicolet G (1971): Avian gastrulation. In Abercrombie M, Brachet J,
King TJ (eds): "Advances in Morphogenesis." New York: Academic
Press, pp 231-262.
Oh S, Li E (1997): The signaling pathway mediated by the type IIB
activin receptor controls axial patterning and lateral asymmetry in
the mouse. Genes Dev 11:1812-1826.
Pagan-Westphal S, Tabin C (1988): The transfer of left-right positional
information during chick embryogenesis. Cell 93:25-35.
Psychoyos D, Stern C (1996a): Fates and migratory routes of primitive
streak cells in the chick embryo. Development 122:1523-1534.
Psychoyos D, Stern C (1996b): Restoration of the organizer after
radical ablation of Hensen's node and the anterior primitive streak
in the chick embryo. Development 122:3263-3273.
Rosenquist G (1966): A radioautographic study of labeled grafts in the
chick blastoderm. In "Contributions to Embryology." Washington,
DC: Carnegie Institution, pp 71-110.
Salisbury J, Watt F (1988): Lack of keratan sulphate in the human
notochord. J Anat 157:175-179.
Sampath K, Cheng A, Frisch A, Wright C (1997): Functional differ-
ences among Xenopus nodal-related genes in left-right axis determi-
nation. Development 124:3293-3302.
Schoenwolf G, Garcia-Martinez V, Dias M (1992): Mesoderm move-
ment and fate during avian gastrulation and neurulation. Dev Dyn
193:235-248.
Vakaet L (1970): Cinephotomicrographic investigations of gastrula-
tion in the chick blastoderm. Arch Biol 81:387-426.
Wood W (1997): Left-right asymmetry in animal development. Ann
Rev Cell Dev Biol 13:53-82.
Yuan S, Darnell D, Schoenwolf G (1995a): Identification of inducing,
responding, and suppressing regions in an experimental model of
notochord formation in avian embryos. Dev Biol 172:567-584.
Yuan S, Darnell D, Schoenwolf G (1995b): Identification of inducing,
responding, and suppressing regions in an experimental model of
notochord formation in avian embryos. Dev Biol 172:567-584.
Yuan S, Darnell D, Schoenwolf G (1995c): Mesodermal patterning
during avian gastrulation and neurulation. Dev Gen 17:38-54.
Yuan S, Schoenwolf G (1998): De novo induction of the organizer and
formation of the primitive streak in an experimental model of
notochord reconstitution in avian embryos. Development 125:201-
213.