Asymmetric expression of Syndecan-2 in early chick embryogenesis

Takahiro Fukumoto, Michael Levin*
Cytokine Biology Department, The Forsyth Institute, 140 The Fenway, Boston, MA 02115, USA

Abstract

Chicken Syndecan-2 (cSyndecan-2) is the homologue of Xenopus Syndecan-2, a member of the heparan sulfate proteoglycan family with an important role in left-right patterning in frog embryos. A relationship to LR asymmetry in other species has not been reported. We show that cSyndecan-2 is expressed throughout the primitive streak between st. 1 and 3 in the chick embryo, and is restricted to the rostral and caudal tips of the primitive streak at st. 4. It displays distinct left-right asymmetry, being expressed in the right side of Hensen's node at st. 5. The asymmetric expression of cSyndecan-2 is maintained around the node between st. 5 and 7. At early somite stages, somites and neural folds express cSyndecan-2. The somite expression disappears by st. 11, but strong expression in the neural tube continues. Our data reveal a new asymmetric transcript in the chick embryo and indicate that in contrast to protein-level asymmetries, which underlie syndecan-2 function in Xenopus, chick syndecan-2 exhibits asymmetry at the mRNA level.


[PAGE 1] 1. Results and discussion

Syndecans are a family of transmembrane heparan sulfate proteoglycans (HSPGs) with highly conserved cytoplasmic domains and heparan sulfate glycosaminoglycans covalently attached to their extracellular domain. Genes in this family have been proposed to play essential roles during development (Rapraeger, 2001). Syndecan-2 is known to be an important component of left-right patterning in early Xenopus embryos and is a Vg1 cofactor that regulates transduction of Vg1-related signals (Kramer et al., 2002; Kramer and Yost, 2002), one of the most critical signaling factors in early embryogenesis (Seleiro et al., 1996). Syndecan-2 gene expression and its function in early embryogenesis have been studied in frog, where the Syndecan-2 asymmetry is observed at the post-translational level (Kramer et al., 2002; Kramer and Yost, 2002; Teel and Yost, 1996). Because of the importance of left-right asymmetry in embryonic patterning (Cooke, 2004) and the considerable current controversy about the divergence of early asymmetry mechanisms among different species (Burdine and Schier, 2000; Levin, 2003; Yost, 2001), we characterized Syndecan-2 expression in the chick embryo during stages at which asymmetry is being elaborated.

We cloned cSyndecan-2 based on homology to existing Syndecan clones (Chen et al., 2002). cSyndecan-2 expression was weakly expressed at the posterior margin at st. 0 (Fig. 1A). In situ hybridization analysis detected cSyndecan-2 expression at the base of the primitive streak at st. 1, and it is expressed throughout the primitive streak until st. 3 (Fig. 1B-D). Sectioning revealed cSyndecan-2 expression in the mesendodermal layer (Fig. 1N). At st. 4, after the primitive streak has reached its maximal length, cSyndecan-2 is expressed symmetrically at Hensen's node and at the base of the primitive streak (Fig. 1E). Interestingly, the expression pattern of cSyndecan-2 becomes asymmetric and is expressed on the right of the node at st. 5 and 6 (Fig. 1F,G, close-up of node in Fig. 1K,L). Sectioning confirmed asymmetric expression immediately lateral to the primitive pit (Fig. 1M). This distinct asymmetric gene expression is maintained until st. 7 (Fig. 1H), but disappears by st. 8 (Fig. 1J). At st. 7, cSyndecan-2 becomes expressed in an area coincident with the first somite (Fig. 1H; compare to expression of cSerrate-2, a somite marker (Caprioli et al., 2002), Fig. 11). Between st. 8 and 11, signal is observed in the somites and the neural folds (Fig. 1J). Sectioning confirmed expression within the mesoderm layer of the neural folds (Fig. 1O,P).

[PAGE 3] By st. 12, the neural tube expression is very strong, and the lateral plate mesoderm exhibited a lower level of expression (Fig. 1Q, section in Fig. 1T). Higher magnification reveals strong expression throughout the neural tube, and in the central, but not the peripheral, cells of the notochord (Fig. 1U). By st. 15, the neural tube staining has weakened, and no expression was observed in the heart or other tissues (Fig. 1R). Sectioning revealed that the disappearance of the cSyndecan-2 transcript begins with the dorsal part of the neural tube (Fig. 1V, white arrow), but signal can still be observed in the ventral part of the neural tube and the notochord (Fig. 1V, red arrow). The expression of cSyndecan-2 weakens progressively in subsequent stages; by st. 18, most of the embryo exhibited only a very low background level of expression, with the exception of the eye (Young et al., 2003), where the lens continued to express cSyndecan-2 strongly (Fig. 1S,W). Examination of embryos until st. 23 revealed no specific stain.

Our data identify a transcription-level asymmetry in chick Syndecan-2 at late gastrulation, and are consistent with a number of LR asymmetry pathways that occur at the protein level in Xenopus, but at the mRNA level in chick (Levin and Mercola, 1998, 1999).

[PAGE 3] 2. Experimental procedures

The full-length sequence of cSyndecan-2 (606 bases) was amplified from RNA extracted from st. 23 chicken embryos, using primers cSyn2F (5'-ATGCGGTGCGTGTGGCTCGCGC-3') and cSyn2R (5'-TTATGCATAAAACTCCTTAGTAG-3') based on Gene Bank information (accession number: AF508229). This was cloned into the vector pBluescript SK(+). pBS-SK(+)—cSyndecan-2 was linearized using EcoRV (Takara) and transcribed with T3 polymerase to give a DIG-labeled antisense transcript, and this was used for in situ hybridization according to standard protocols (Stern and Holland, 1993). All chick stages are according to (Hamburger and Hamilton, 1992).


[PAGE 3] Acknowledgements

cSerrate-2 was a kind gift of Cliff Tabin and Constance Cepko. M.L. gratefully acknowledges support of the American Cancer Society (Research Scholar Grant RSG-02-046-01), and the National Science Foundation (grant IBN-0234388). This work was also supported by grants from The Mochida Memorial Foundation for Medical and Pharmaceutical Research and The Uehara Memorial Foundation to T.F.