Eya2 promotes cell cycle progression by regulating DNA damage response during vertebrate limb regeneration

Abstract
How salamanders accomplish progenitor cell proliferation while faithfully maintaining genomic integrity and regenerative potential remains elusive. Here we found an innate DNA damage response mechanism that is evident during blastema proliferation (early- to late-bud) and studied its role during tissue regeneration by ablating the function of one of its components, Eyes absent 2. In *eya2* mutant axolotls, we found that DNA damage signaling through the H2AX histone variant was deregulated, especially within the proliferating progenitors during limb regeneration. Ultimately, cell cycle progression was impaired at the G1/S and G2/M transitions and regeneration rate was reduced. Similar data were acquired using acute pharmacological inhibition of the Eya2 phosphatase activity and the DNA damage checkpoint kinases Chk1 and Chk2 in wild-type axolotls. Together, our data indicate that highly-regenerative animals employ a robust DNA damage response pathway which involves regulation of H2AX phosphorylation via Eya2 to facilitate proper cell cycle progression upon injury.


[PAGE 1] Introduction
DNA damage response (DDR) is an important process in ensuring cellular function. Genotoxic stress can cause senescence and apoptosis in proliferating cells or carcinogenesis when oncogenes are affected (Zeman and Cimprich, 2014; Vitale et al., 2017). Upon DNA damage, sensor proteins initiate a DDR that eventually guides DNA repair enzymes to resolve the lesion (Huen and Chen, 2008). The histone variant H2AX is considered a major DNA damage mediator protein because it is used as a scaffold for protein-protein interactions based on its amino acid modifications. H2AX phosphorylated at the 139 serine, commonly known as gamma-H2AX (γ-H2AX), is widely used as a DNA damage marker because it is found aggregated near lesions shortly after they occur (Huen and Chen, 2008; Yuan et al., 2010; Rogakou et al., 1998). Acting in concert to ensure genomic stability, cell cycle checkpoints ordinarily prevent cells from progressing before resolving DNA damage. Cell cycle arrest through activation of DNA damage checkpoints via Chk1 and Chk2 is an important part of the DDR mechanism (Zhou and Elledge, 2000; Bartek and Lukas, 2003; Smith et al., 2010). DNA repair resolves the DDR and protein modifications are reversed so normal cellular function can be resumed (Shaltiel et al., 2015).

[PAGE 2] However, DDR does not always lead to DNA repair; molecular safeguards mediate critical decisions as to whether the amount of DNA damage is amendable, or whether apoptosis should be triggered instead (Cook et al., 2009). These molecular switches, such as p53, are known tumor suppressors and, when deregulated, apoptosis is circumvented, and carcinogenesis could occur (Lakin and Jackson, 1999). For instance, in vitro cultured human stem cells experience DNA damage and chromosomal rearrangements that change their cellular fate and render them carcinogenic and unsuitable for use in clinical applications in regenerative medicine (Vitale et al., 2017). On the other hand, amphibians can faithfully regenerate body parts throughout life, often even when repeatedly challenged (Bryant et al., 2017a; Bryant et al., 2017b; Sousounis et al., 2015; Eguchi et al., 2011). Replicative stress and reactive oxygen species generated during the process could challenge regeneration, at the cellular level by inhibiting cell cycle progression or at the functional level by losing the ability to form a proper structure (Sousounis et al., 2014; Al Haj Baddar et al., 2018; Ferreira et al., 2016).

How do amphibians regulate genotoxic stress and DDR while ensuring tissue regeneration? Previous studies have shown that during early phases of regeneration, the activity of p53 is reduced to allow for progenitor cell cycle re-entry (Yun et al., 2013), but it is later activated to enable differentiation (Villiard et al., 2007). Since p53 is a major regulator of DDR, amphibians might be de-sensitized to DNA damage allowing for rapid progression through the cell cycle checkpoints. Their massive genome could also facilitate this process; it has been previously shown that DNA damage is more likely to occur in areas that do not encompass coding regions and regulatory elements, like retrotransposons, which are significantly abundant in amphibian genomes (Poetsch et al., 2018; Smith et al., 2019; Nowoshilow et al., 2018; Elewa et al., 2017). A completely opposite (but not mutually exclusive) strategy would entail the initiation of a DDR together with the onset of the regeneration process to ensure rapid DNA repair and cell cycle progression. Studies that have repeatedly initiated the regeneration process, for example when newt lenses were removed and successfully regenerated 19 times over 18 years, support this hypothesis since the structure and function of the genome would remain intact over many rounds of cell division (Sousounis et al., 2015; Eguchi et al., 2011; Sousounis et al., 2014a). In addition, high-throughput gene expression datasets acquired from regenerative tissues show up-regulation of DNA repair genes across multiple organs and animal species, indicating that a proper DDR might be an innate part of the regenerative mechanism (Sousounis et al., 2014; Darnet et al., 2019; Barghouth et al., 2019; Shiroor et al., 2019; Bedelbaeva et al., 2010). This mechanism could occur in conjunction with clearing senescent cells from regenerating tissues, which would allow only resilient proliferating progenitors to be present in the blastema (Yun et al., 2015).

Here, we address these two hypotheses in the context of axolotl limb regeneration. We first investigated the relationship between DDR and tissue regeneration. We found an elevated DDR following limb amputation, which was accompanied by reduced relative γ-H2AX levels and baseline amounts of DNA damage. Then we asked whether DDR is necessary for limb regeneration. To answer this question, we genetically targeted a DDR- and H2AX-associated gene, eyes absent 2 (*eya2*). Eya2 regulates H2AX phosphorylation status, mediates decisions regarding DNA repair (Cook et al., 2009), and has been shown to be up-regulated during regenerative processes (Stewart et al., 2013; Sousounis et al., 2014b). We generated Eya2 mutant axolotls and found that their regenerative capability was significantly reduced and their γ-H2AX levels were significantly elevated, especially in cells that have entered the cell cycle. Interestingly, we did not detect accumulation of DNA damage, indicating that our model specifically de-regulated the DDR process. RNAseq analysis of *eya2*⁻/⁻ tissues and pharmacological inhibition of Eya2's phosphatase activity were also used to corroborate our findings. In addition, we uncovered parallel evidence that DDR is required for successful regeneration as inhibiting a separate component of this process, the proper control of the DNA damage checkpoints by Chk1 and Chk2, led to severe regenerative impairment. This study reveals that DDR is an innate part of the regeneration process and identifies Eya2 as a regulator of DDR and cell cycle progression during progenitor cell proliferation. How amphibians regulate DDR and allow for cellular proliferation while maintaining cell fate could reveal important clues for improving the use of human stem cells in regenerative medicine.


[PAGE 3] Results
Axolotl limb regeneration is associated with elevated DNA damage response and low genotoxic stress in progenitor cells

To identify the presence of a DNA damage response (DDR) following limb amputation, we analyzed transcriptomic profiles from previously published expression datasets acquired by RNAseq and microarrays that included a complete time course of regeneration (Stewart et al., 2013; Voss et al., 2015). We analyzed 190 genes associated with DDR and DNA repair from both datasets (Supplementary file 1). We found expression of DDR-related genes to be mostly up-regulated during regeneration (Figure 1a, Green). Genes also appeared up-regulated irrespective of their molecular role during DDR (Figure 1-figure supplement 1a). We validated the expression of 17 genes using qPCR and found that 11 (65%) of them were up-regulated during regeneration (Figure 1-figure supplement 2). We then focused on genes that have tentative functions in promoting DNA repair, as these genes may regulate DDR for proper cell cycle entry and regeneration (see Materials and methods, Supplementary file 1). The genes in this subcategory also appeared up-regulated during regeneration (+DDR, Figure 1b). Overall, our transcriptomic and qPCR analysis of DNA repair/damage genes revealed that DDR was evident as early as the early-bud blastema (~5 dpa) and peaked at the late-bud blastema (~14 dpa). To associate this response with the levels of actual DNA damage, we performed alkaline single cell gel electrophoresis (comet assay) and found that there are no differences between intact and 14 dpa blastema cells, whereas cells treated with UV showed more DNA damage (Figure 1c and Figure 1-figure supplement 1b). To corroborate these data, we focused on the DNA damage mediator histone H2AX. First, we analyzed the axolotl *h2afx* sequence using two strategies: phylogenetic tree construction (Figure 1d) and multiple sequence alignment (Figure 1-figure supplement 1c). We found that axolotl H2AX has a conserved carboxyl tail containing the S139, also known as γ-H2AX when phosphorylated, and Y142 (Cook et al., 2009; Yuan et al., 2010; Figure 1-figure supplement 1c, green box). We validated antibodies detecting these phosphorylation sites in vitro using AL1 axolotl fibroblast cells following UV treatment (Figure 1-figure supplement 1d-e). RNAseq and qPCR also revealed that *h2afx* expression was significantly up-regulated during regeneration (Figure 1b and Figure 1e). We then used western blot to determine the phosphorylation state of H2AX in axolotl tissues. Using samples acquired across different time points during limb regeneration, we found that the total amount of H2AX and pY142-H2AX were elevated compared to GAPDH starting at 5 dpa, corroborating the presence of a DDR in the early- and late-bud blastema (Materials and methods, Figure 1-figure supplement 3). To analyze this process in greater depth, we focused on blastema samples at 14 dpa, the time that DDR was found to be the most elevated (Figure 1f). We again found that the total amount of H2AX protein was increased during regeneration (Figure 1g), following the same trend as its mRNA levels (*h2afx*, Figure 1b and Figure 1e). The total levels of γ-H2AX protein were also increased (Figure 1h); however, the relative ratio of γ-H2AX to total H2AX protein was decreased during regeneration (Figure 1i). Overall, these data indicated that blastema cells may require more γ-H2AX to rapidly correct replication errors during proliferation but kept a low γ-H2AX/H2AX ratio to reduce potential genotoxic stress signals that could hinder cell cycle progression (Rogakou et al., 1998; Fernandez-Capetillo et al., 2004). Interestingly, we identified that the relative pY142-H2AX levels were increased at 14 dpa (Figure 1j and Figure 1k), which suggested that H2AX regulation was important during regeneration and a potential target to study in association with DDR and genome integrity. Together, these results suggest that DDR is evident during early-bud blastema and peaks at late-bud blastema, thereby preventing accumulation of DNA damage during regeneration. This may enable high levels of cellular proliferation despite local environmental genotoxic stressors. To further test this hypothesis, we aimed to genetically ablate one of the DDR components and identify whether challenging this process would have an impact on the regenerative capacity.


[PAGE 3] Eya2 is widely expressed in early-bud blastema and is associated with DNA repair and cell cycle during regeneration

Since pY142-H2AX levels were found to be elevated during regeneration (Figure 1k and Figure 1-figure supplement 3), we focused on the Eyes absent (Eya) protein family, which are known regulators of H2AX phosphorylation status and initiators of DNA repair through their phosphatase domain (Cook et al., 2009). We first investigated the spatial and temporal expression of individual members upon limb amputation. We found that *eya2* is the most highly-expressed gene of its family and is also highly up-regulated post-amputation (Figure 2a, *eya2*) (Stewart et al., 2013). We additionally performed qPCR and verified its expression profile during regeneration (Figure 2b). Phylogenetic tree analysis using the entire Eya family further validated homology to other vertebrate orthologs of Eya2 (Figure 2c). In order to associate Eya2 with DNA repair during limb regeneration, we performed a co-expression correlation analysis using RNAseq transcriptomic data from limb/blastema samples at 0, 3, 5, 7, 10, 14, 21, and 28 days following amputation (Supplementary file 2). Genes positively associated (R² >0.8, slope >0) and negatively associated (R² >0.8, slope <0) with *eya2* expression were used for Gene Ontology Enrichment Analysis (Figure 2-figure supplement 1a and b, respectively). Using this method, we found that the expression profiles of genes involved in DNA repair and cell cycle were positively correlated with *eya2* expression, suggesting Eya2's involvement in these processes during limb regeneration (Figure 2d, blue bar). Conversely, mature muscle genes were negatively correlated with *eya2* expression, consistent with *eya2*'s role during early muscle development in other vertebrates (Heanue et al., 1999; Figure 2d, red bar). To test whether the axolotl Eya2 protein physically interacts with an H2AX-containing complex in cells, we performed an immunoprecipitation experiment using a tagged version of the axolotl Eya2, and we detected the phosphorylated form of H2AX in the precipitate (Figure 2e). Taken together, these data suggest that Eya2 plays a role in cell cycle and DNA repair regulation during regeneration and that Eya2 interacts with phosphorylated H2AX.


[PAGE 5] To identify which cells express *eya2* during regeneration, we performed RNA in situ hybridization and found *eya2* mRNA detectable in the majority of blastema cells and wound epidermis at 5 dpa (red puncta, Figure 2f). These cells are known to encompass limb progenitors of all lineages including skin, muscle, connective tissue, and cartilage (Whited et al., 2013; Currie et al., 2016; Gerber et al., 2018; Leigh et al., 2018). Indeed, time-course double in situ hybridization of *eya2* and *prrx1*, a connective tissue progenitor marker (Gerber et al., 2018), further validated *eya2* expression in the connective tissue lineage. We found that *eya2* and *prrx1* co-localized in connective tissue progenitors throughout regeneration, and we further observed *eya2* expression in muscle as well. In intact tissue, *eya2* and *prrx1* were present in periosteal cells, which are known to participate in cartilage regeneration (McCusker et al., 2016), while *eya2* alone was present in the muscle (Figure 2g and h). In the early-bud blastema (7 dpa), *eya2* and *prrx1* showed expression throughout the blastema with *prrx1* being very robust (Figure 2g'). In the mid- to late-bud blastema (14 dpa), *eya2* and *prrx1* started to compartmentalize, with *eya2* having strong expression in the developing muscle which appeared to be contiguous with the mature fibers in the stump, and *prrx1* aggregating in the rest of the blastema (Figure 2g"). Interestingly, *eya2* and *prrx1* double-positive cells were clearly present in the boundary between high-*eya2* and high-*prrx1* expressing areas (Figure 2h'). This suggested that these areas contained early connective tissue progenitor cells that still expressed *eya2* and, as these cells mature, they become *prrx1*-only positive in the center of chondrogenesis (Balic et al., 2009). This phenomenon was more evident in palette stage limbs (21 dpa) where muscle/cartilage boundaries were more defined (Figure 2g" and h"). We also identified that *eya2* was expressed in the wound epidermis at 5 dpa (Figure 2f).

[PAGE 7] Eya2 mutant axolotls have reduced rate of regeneration and slower cell cycle progression
To determine whether DDR is important for limb regeneration, we targeted the *eya2* locus with a specific CRISPR/Cas9 ribonucleoprotein complex and generated *eya2* mutant axolotls (*eya2⁻/⁻*) (Figure 3-figure supplement 1a-b). Based on the genotyping, the Eya2 mutant protein is predicted to be severely truncated and lacking both the phosphatase and transactivation domains (Figure 3-figure supplement 1a). *eya2⁻/⁻* axolotls developed normal limbs with muscle, bone, and nerves (Figure 3-figure supplement 2a-d). The *eya2⁻/⁻* animals could be easily identified by the presence of an intra-peritoneal edema which was also correlated with malformed kidneys (Figure 3-figure supplement 2e, red box). To determine the effects of ablating the function of Eya2 during limb regeneration, we imaged blastemas and quantified their length over time (Figure 3a). The data indicated that *eya2⁻/⁻* axolotls have reduced blastema length compared to *eya2⁺/⁻* and *eya2⁺/⁺* at multiple time points (Figure 3b and c). We did not observe haploinsufficiency or major differences between *eya2⁺/⁺* and *eya2⁺/⁻*, so all subsequent comparisons were focused on *eya2⁻/⁻* and *eya2⁺/⁺* genotypes. At 30 dpa, a pre-selected time point which captures regeneration before the end of the growth process, we collected the regenerated limbs and visualized their skeletons using alcian blue and alizarin red S stains (Figure 3d). To determine the size of the regenerate at 30 dpa, we measured their zeugopod length relative to animal size and found that *eya2⁻/⁻* animals regenerated smaller limbs, suggesting that the rate of regeneration was impaired (Figure 3e, see also Figure 3-figure supplement 2c-d for their size before amputation). We then analyzed their skeletal pattern for completion and found that none of the *eya2⁻/⁻* animals (n = 0/18 limbs from nine animals) had a fully-patterned skeleton compared to 17% of *eya2⁺/⁺* (n = 3/18 limbs from nine animals, 3 × 2 Contingency Table: p-value<0.05, Figure 3f). These data indicated that *eya2⁻/⁻* axolotls regenerated limbs more slowly, impacting the volume of the regenerate as well as the phase of the regenerative process, compared to *eya2⁺/⁺* siblings. We then tested whether *eya2⁻/⁻* animals had an overall slower growth rate and found that even though all genotypes had approximately the same size animals at the time of amputation (Figure 3-figure supplement 2f), *eya2⁻/⁻* animals were slightly longer at 30 dpa (Figure 3-figure supplement 2g). These data indicated that the slower growth of the *eya2⁻/⁻* blastema was due to impairment of the regenerative process itself. We then investigated whether the slower regeneration rate was associated with proliferation deficiencies in limb progenitors. To test this possibility, we performed an 18 hr pulse with the nucleotide analogue EdU and subsequent detection as well as an immunofluorescence assay with the mitotic marker phosphoS10-Histone H3 (pH3) on 5 dpa blastema sections (Figure 3g and h). At this time point we had previously observed that *eya2* was widely expressed throughout the blastema (Figure 2f). *eya2⁻/⁻* blastemas had reduced rates of cell cycle entry indicated by a decrease in EdU⁺ cells (Figure 3i) and decreased mitotic activity as evidenced by a decrease in pH3⁺ blastema cells (Figure 3j). To identify whether the rate-limiting factor was S phase entry, which in turn limits the number of cells at the G2 and M phases, or whether there were roadblocks at later phases, we quantified double-positive EdU and pH3 cells. Interestingly, we found a reduced percentage of double EdU⁺/pH3⁺ cells in the *eya2⁻/⁻* blastemas, which indicated that cell cycle progression was also stalled at the G2/M phase (Figure 3k).

To further investigate the proliferation deficits observed at the cellular level, we performed western blot analysis of proteins known for their role during the cell cycle (Figure 3-figure supplement 3a). We found that the amount of the Cyclin-dependent kinase 2 (CDK2) was reduced in the 5 dpa *eya2⁻/⁻* blastemas whereas the G2/M-specific Cyclin B1 was increased (CCNB1, Figure 3-figure supplement 3a). Given that CDK2 is not degraded at any phase of the cell cycle, its reduced presence indicated that the cell cycle was slower without Eya2 (Vermeulen et al., 2003; Malumbres and Barbacid, 2009). Interestingly, CDK2 has been shown to stall the cell cycle at the G1 phase when down-regulated which strengthen our EdU data showing G1/S arrest in Eya2 mutant blastemas (Neganova et al., 2011). Cyclin B1 protein levels normally increase during the G2 phase and decline following mitosis (Gong and Ferrell, 2010; Gong et al., 2007). The elevated levels of Cyclin B1 in *eya2⁻/⁻* blastemas strongly suggest that the cell cycle is stalled at the G2/M DNA damage checkpoint corroborating our pH3/EdU data (Figure 3k). Taken together, these data show that ablation of Eya2 transactivation and phosphatase domains has a regeneration phenotype associated with slower cell cycle progression at the two major checkpoint transitions, G1/S and G2/M.

[PAGE 10] Eya2 axolotls have increased levels of γ-H2AX specifically associated with cycling blastema cells
G1/S and G2/M checkpoints are activated upon cellular stress including DNA damage (Zhou and Elledge, 2000); thus, we analyzed the phosphorylation status of H2AX as described earlier (Figure 4a). We found that 5 dpa blastemas from *eya2⁻/⁻* animals had increased levels of relative γ-H2AX compared to those from *eya2⁺/⁺* siblings (Figure 4b), suggesting that the activated cell cycle checkpoints may be associated with increased levels of genotoxic stress. In contrast, *eya2⁺/⁻* blastemas showed increased levels of pY142-H2AX, an outcome that correlated with the reduced Eya2 activity in the heterozygous background (Figure 4c and d). Since pY142-H2AX is a direct target of the Eya2 phosphatase domain, the data also indicate that the induced mutations in the *eya2* locus do in fact generate dysfunctional Eya2 mutant protein. However, we did not detect significant changes at pY142-H2AX between *eya2⁻/⁻* and *eya2⁺/⁺* (Figure 4c and d). The discrepancy between *eya2⁻/⁻* and *eya2⁺/⁻* in the pY142-H2AX levels might be due to compensatory mechanisms that prevents persistently high levels of bi-phosphorylated H2AX, a known cause of cell death (Cook et al., 2009). This possibility is supported by TUNEL staining in which we could not detect blastema cells undergoing apoptosis in *eya2⁻/⁻* animals (Figure 4-figure supplement 1a). We then focused on understanding why *eya2⁻/⁻* axolotls have increased γ-H2AX levels. To investigate this, we performed immunohistochemistry against γ-H2AX on tissue sections and identified a robust stain at the skin and wound epidermis (Figure 4-figure supplement 1a'). Its high fluorescence intensity throughout the skin did not allow us to detect the characteristic nuclear γ-H2AX foci (Nakamura et al., 2010; Figure 4e and f). We then focused on blastema cells in which we were able to detect and quantify nuclear γ-H2AX foci per area in EdU⁺ and EdU⁻ cells (Figure 4g). Our analysis revealed that EdU⁺ cells had more γ-H2AX foci per nuclear area than EdU⁻ cells, irrespective of genotype (Figure 4h, Two-way ANOVA, Row factor p-value<0.0001, F(1,30) = 62.39, DF = 1). These data support our initial findings that during limb regeneration total γ-H2AX levels were elevated to alleviate replication stress during blastema cell proliferation (Figure 1h, Figure 1-figure supplement 3). Notably, our data revealed that EdU⁺ *eya2⁻/⁻* blastema cells had significantly more γ-H2AX foci per area compared to those of *eya2⁺/⁺* (Figure 4h). This indicated that when blastema cells without Eya2 activity enter S-phase, they acquire more hallmarks of genotoxic stress, which also corroborated our earlier data showing cell cycle arrest at the G2/M checkpoint (Figure 3k, Figure 3-figure supplement 3a). We further identified that the increased presence of γ-H2AX foci was due to more cells having a high number of foci per area and fewer cells having low number of foci (Figure 4i). We also found that EdU⁺ cells were bigger in size compared to EdU⁻ cells across all genotypes (Figure 4-figure supplement 1b, two-way ANOVA, Row Factor p-value=0.004, F(1,30)=16.13, DF = 1); however, differences in the number of γ-H2AX foci per area of the nucleus within the EdU⁺ population were not due to variations in the cell size (Figure 4-figure supplement 1b-c). In addition, when foci from all blastema cells were taken into consideration, there was no difference across genotypes; thus, the effect was found to be specific to cycling blastema cells (Figure 4-figure supplement 1d). Since *eya2⁻/⁻* blastema cells showed increased levels of the DNA damage marker γ-H2AX they might have also accumulated DNA damage. To test this, we performed comet assays on blastema cells from all three genotypes and found that ablation of Eya2's transactivation and phosphatase domains does not affect the amount of DNA damage; hence, this phenotype appears specific to how DDR is regulated (Figure 4-figure supplement 1e). Taken together, these data revealed that functionally ablating one of the components of DDR, Eya2, reduced regeneration rate, which was associated with a genotoxic stress-like phenotype including slower cell cycle dynamics and increased levels of γ-H2AX in proliferating blastema cells.

[PAGE 12] RNAseq analysis of *eya2⁻/⁻* blastema during limb regeneration validates cell cycle arrest, H2AX de-regulation and elevated DDR
In order to better understand the connection between Eya2, DDR and regeneration, we performed RNAseq in intact and blastema tissues at different timepoints upon amputation from all three *eya2* genotypes. Computational analysis revealed 4461 genes to be differentially regulated (q < 0.05) between genotypes (Supplementary file 3). From these, most of them appeared to be down-regulated in *eya2⁻/⁻* compared to *eya2⁺/⁺* tissues. GO analysis revealed terms previously found to be enriched in the dataset positively-associated with *eya2* expression (Figure 5-figure supplement 1).  Specifically, we found that genes associated with DNA repair and cell cycle were down-regulated in *eya2⁻/⁻* tissues (Figure 5a and b). Interestingly, *eya2* itself was found to be significantly up-regulated in *eya2⁻/⁻* tissues, indicating a potential compensatory mechanism to alleviate the loss of Eya2 activity (Figure 5c and d). We also analyzed the expression of genes known to mark specific cell types during axolotl limb regeneration and found no significant changes in the expression of macrophage, fibroblast and epidermis markers (Figure 5e). Interestingly, the connective tissue progenitor marker *prrx1* appeared up-regulated in the *eya2⁻/⁻* blastemas (Figure 5e). These data indicated that there was no loss of any particular cell type in the blastema in absence of Eya2 which further supported a broader role in DDR regulation and cell cycle progression for all limb progenitors. Lastly, we isolated genes known to promote G1/S and G2/M checkpoints and visualized their expression in volcano plots (Liu et al., 2017). The data showed that *eya2⁻/⁻* blastemas have down-regulated the majority of these genes, further strengthening our hypothesis that the cell cycle is stalled at the G1/S and G2/M checkpoints in absence of Eya2 activity (Figure 5f and g). Taken together, RNAseq analysis revealed down-regulation of genes involved in cell cycle progression specifically involved at the G1/S and G2/M checkpoints as well as H2AX deregulation which corroborated our previous molecular data showing reduced EdU/pH3 staining (Figure 3k) while H2AX phosphorylation was aberrantly regulated in *eya2⁻/⁻* mutant blastema cells (Figure 4a). In addition, the RNAseq data revealed up-regulation of genes consistent with an active compensatory mechanism to alleviate stress and the loss of Eya2 which included the up-regulation of the *eya2* gene itself.

[PAGE 14] Pharmacological inhibition of Eya2 upon amputation impairs regeneration and confirms its role in DDR
By genetically ablating Eya2's transactivation and phosphatase domains, we were able to demonstrate its importance during DDR and regeneration. However, our RNAseq analysis revealed a potential compensatory mechanism which was ultimately reflected in the ability of *eya2⁻/⁻* axolotls to successfully regenerate limbs, albeit at a slower pace. To investigate whether this compensation could be employed at the time of amputation in wild-type animals, we used a previously characterized pharmacological inhibitor of Eya2 (Krueger et al., 2014; Krueger et al., 2013) and asked whether we could phenocopy the DDR defects we observed in our *eya2⁻/⁻* axolotls. We first validated by protein structure analysis that axolotl Eya2 was similar to human Eya2 and displayed the three helices previously found to be important for MLS000544460-mediated inhibition (Krueger et al., 2014; Figure 6-figure supplement 1a and b). Based on the available pharmacokinetic data (Krueger et al., 2014), we administered 25 μΜ MLS000544460 to wild-type white axolotls following amputation and studied its effects on blastema length, proliferation, H2AX regulation, and DNA damage (Figure 6a). As expected, Eya2 inhibition significantly reduced blastema length compared to DMSO controls at 8 dpa (Figure 6b and c). This effect was accompanied by a decrease in EdU⁺ cells following an 18 hr pulse (Figure 6d and e) and an increase in TUNEL⁺ apoptotic cells (Figure 6d and f) in the treated limbs. We have previously shown that γ-H2AX foci accumulate in proliferating limb progenitor cells following amputation (Figure 4h and i) and in combination with the Eya2 inactivation, where pY142 removal is inhibited, could explain an increase of bi-phosphorylated H2AX, a known trigger of apoptosis. To corroborate these data, we used western blot analysis of H2AX where we detected increased levels of pY142- while γ-H2AX remained in the baseline (Figure 6g and h, Figure 6-figure supplement 1c and d). To determine whether increased levels of DNA damage were also present in MLS000544460-treated blastema cells, we performed alkaline comet assays. We found more DNA damage present in blastema cells that had Eya2 activity blocked (Figure 6i), indicating that Eya2 is required for proper DDR in this context. Overall, pharmacological inhibition of Eya2 independently confirmed its role as an important modulatory node for DDR during vertebrate regeneration. In addition, the different phenotypes observed between *eya2⁻/⁻* axolotls and Eya2 inhibitor-treated axolotls during regeneration, especially the increase in apoptotic cells in the latter, revealed that there is functional compensation that could prevent apoptosis in cells subject to genotoxic stress. This phenomenon has also been observed in other CRISPR/Cas9-mediated models including axolotls (Junker, 2019; Rossi et al., 2015; Tsai et al., 2020).

[PAGE 16] Pharmacological inhibition of Chk1 and Chk2 upon amputation impairs regeneration
Our genetic and pharmacological experiments targeting Eya2 have shown that DDR is an important aspect of the regenerative process. To broaden our experiments and the implications of DDR in tissue regeneration, we pharmacologically inhibited the serine/threonine-protein kinases Chk1 and Chk2, which are known to regulate the G1/S and G2/M cell cycle transitions upon DNA damage (Bartek and Lukas, 2003; Smith et al., 2010). We used the same experimental design as before and quantified blastema length at 10 dpa, EdU⁺ and TUNEL⁺ cells in blastema sections, and cell cycle regulators in protein extracts (Figure 6j). Our data phenocopy the Eya2 inhibition, showing smaller blastema length (Figure 6k and l), reduced levels of EdU⁺ cells and increased TUNEL⁺ cells (Figure 6m and n) indicating reduced cell cycle progression and increased apoptosis. To validate that the inhibitor deregulated the G1/S and G2/M checkpoints as intended we blotted for CDK2, CCNB1 and p-CDC2, and found them reduced upon Chk1 and Chk2 inhibition (Figure 6o). Taken together, by inhibiting another key aspect of DDR, we were able to impede tissue regrowth, further strengthening the hypothesis that proper regulation of genotoxic stress is required for regeneration.

[PAGE 16] Discussion
DNA damage response is an integral process of tissue regeneration
Following limb amputation, a DDR is elevated (Figure 1a and b, Figure 1-figure supplement 1a, and Figure 1-figure supplement 2) which is consistent with previous studies that showed up-regulation of DNA repair genes during different regenerative processes (Sousounis et al., 2014; Darnet et al., 2019). However, whether DDR is necessary for successful regeneration or instead is a transcriptional artifact due to the functional annotation of certain genes that have additional roles remained unknown. The differential regulation of H2AX at the RNA, protein and protein modification levels following limb amputation provided evidence that DDR is active during regeneration (Figure 1b and e-k and Figure 1-figure supplement 3). In fact, at the cellular level, progenitors that have entered the cell cycle displayed increased numbers of γ-H2AX foci in their nucleus, indicative of genotoxic stress, but at the tissue level the relative amounts of γ-H2AX were reduced due to increased levels of unphosphorylated H2AX (Figure 1i, Figure 1-figure supplement 3 and Figure 4h). This illustrates the balanced role of DDR during regeneration: efficient DNA repair to ensure integrity but allowing cell cycle progression. Stronger evidence that DDR is an integrated part of the regenerative process was uncovered when we genetically ablated both of the two expected functional domains of one of the DDR's components, Eya2. Our molecular, biochemical and transcriptomic data indicate de-regulation of the DDR process with increased levels of γ-H2AX and further up-regulation of other DDR genes (Figure 4a, Figure 4h and Figure 5b). These resulted in significantly slower cell cycle dynamics with