Uncertainty Minimization and Pattern Recognition
in Volvox Carteri and Volvox Aureus
Franz Kuchling¹, Isha Singh¹, Mridushi Daga¹, Susan Zec¹, Alexandra Kunen¹, Michael Levin1*
¹Allen Discovery Center, Tufts University, Medford MA (US)
*Corresponding Author. Michael.Levin@tufts.edu
Keywords: Volvox, surprise, minimal cognition, diverse intelligence, algae
Running title: Uncertainty minimization in algae

[PAGE 2] Abstract
Learning and a spectrum of other behavioral competencies allow organisms to rapidly adapt to dynamically changing environmental variations. The emerging field of diverse intelligence seeks to understand what systems, besides ones with complex brains, exhibit these capacities. Here, we tested predictions of a general computational framework based on the free energy principle in neuroscience but applied to aneural biological process as established previously, by demonstrating and manipulating pattern recognition in a simple aneural organism, the green algae Volvox. Our studies of the adaptive photoresponse in Volvox reveal that aneural organisms can distinguish between patterned and randomized inputs and indicate how this is achieved mechanistically. We show that the phototactic response in Volvox adapts more readily to regular light pulse patterns than to irregular ones, thus exhibiting a crucial component of basal intelligence - generalization: the ability to recognize patterns in input stimuli. Randomized electric shocks reduced the ability of Volvox to maintain adaptive phototaxis significantly more than regularly applied electric shocks, providing first evidence for a stress effect of randomized input patterns in a primitive organism. Moreover, we detected memory in Volvox – a persistence of movement towards past light stimulation through their phototactic orientation, another foundational aspect of neural-like primitive cognition. Combined, these data reveal that Volvox exhibit a capacity for pattern recognition consistent with uncertainty minimization. The ability of algae to be surprised and distinguish random events that do not meet expected patterns further expands neurobiological concepts beyond neurons. These methods can likely be translated to the study and manipulation of basal cognition in many other living systems.


[PAGE 3] Introduction
Living organisms are good at detecting, responding to, and adapting to variable environments, not just on evolutionary time-scales, but also via short- and long-term adaptive organismal behavior. Interestingly, this does not require brains or advanced nervous systems [1-4]. Examples of learning and adaptive behavioral responses in aneural organisms include context-dependent motility [5, 6], stress response-triggered learning [7, 8], anticipation [8], long range spatial decision-making [9], and associative learning [10] in a range of microbial organisms. Even Embryophytes, despite their apparent lack of dynamic motility, possess highly complex adaptive responses through their fast and complex internal calcium signaling patterns [11]. Similarly, in vascular plants, synaptic adhesions domains and action potentials [12, 13], yield self-identity and recognition capabilities through their use of plant-specific synapses in Cayratia japonica [12], and can detect acoustic vibrations from feeding caterpillars and subsequent elicitation of chemical defenses in Arabidopsis thaliana [14]. Furthermore the slime mold Physarum detects materials properties of its environment via pulsatile mechanosensing and makes growth decisions based on information gleaned about objects at long range [9].

The ability to detect environmental patterns and distinguish them from random noise is considered a basic component of intelligence – the inference of a general pattern from particular experiences. Such a pattern can serve as the primitive basis of counterfactuals, because the recognition of a pattern endows an organism with expectations for what should happen next, before it happens. While ubiquitous seasonal and day-night cycles provide a highly reliable environmental pattern which is constant across generations (and thus can serve as a stable target for selection), it is unclear how much individual aneural organisms can detect and adapt to novel and more variable patterns on much shorter timescales. Our work was motivated by two inter-related questions: How far down the evolutionary scale of complexity do organisms exhibit the ability to detect novel environmental patterns, and do they have


[PAGE 4] 
expectations that may or may not be met? What frameworks can help us understand these capacities in novel substrates?

Changes in a cell's extracellular environment can affect both its current physiological states and its future states, both physiological and genetic. An example of environmentally triggered immediate changes in current cellular active states is seen in basic phototactic organisms, where light-induced protein conformation states coupled to changes in flagellar beating rates result in movement towards or away from light stimuli. The short-term changes in light sensitivity and downstream flagellar beating responsivity that are the core of this ability to orient towards light and maintain direction are referred to as photoadaptation [15]. While the mechanisms of delayed adaptive responses of light-sensitive cells are fairly well-understood in the human visual system as being mediated through intracellular signaling coupled to transcription, translation, and epigenetic modifications, photoadaptation has not been well studied in simpler phototactic organisms such as Volvox.

Work over the last decade has shown that patterned environmental stimuli that differ only in the frequency of presentation to the organism, can elicit distinct downstream signaling events and functional (behavioral) outcomes in many kinds of cellular systems. For example, Mitchell et al. varied osmotic concentrations over time in pulsatile fashion and identified a frequency-specific activation and refractory relationship in the MAPK pathway that inhibits yeast growth severely, but only at specific frequencies of osmotic oscillation [16]. The use of optogenetics to dynamically activate signaling pathways has been a significant contributor to further understanding the mechanistic basis for this ability [17]. A prominent example comes from the Toettcher group, which used optogenetic activation of EGF to vary the temporal dynamics of ERK signaling and showed that temporal variation in activation pulse frequency induction of ERK signaling not only affects the amount of transcription and subsequent translation of a target gene, but can also trigger transcription of different target genes [18, 19].

Physiological bottom-up models employed in the examples above require a high degree of detailed knowledge of the underlying mechanistic biochemical pathway activation and require a high degree of experimental accessibility to those molecular pathways to be useful, which is not always


[PAGE 5] 
possible. Thus, here we aimed to understand these phenomena from a top-down perspective focusing on the response of the system to patterns and information content in its environment - by generalizing a theoretical framework of adaptive responses to dynamic inputs reminiscent of higher-level information processing common to many cellular systems. Using a cognitive Bayesian framework based on our earlier work [20] and that of Karl Friston and others in the field [21-26], we can formulate a model of cellular beliefs (or predictions) that encode what type of signals the cell expects to receive at any given point in time. These cellular beliefs encompass all the receptors and cellular machinery currently expressed and represent the cell's best estimate of which physiological and transcriptional state will make it the most adaptable to current and anticipated environmental effects [20, 27]. Regulatory output aimed at modifying the signaling activity could hence be interpreted as the effort to minimize uncertainties in measurements of the environment compared to expected signaling inputs. Mechanistically, cellular expectations for input signaling activity stem from the state of the internal signaling pathway dynamics of the cell, itself encoded by transcriptional dynamics (with changes occurring in the range of minutes to hours) on the one hand, but also by more short-term state changes in protein conformations (e.g., opening and closing of ion channels and activation and internalization of receptor proteins) and activity profiles (ion inflow, propagation and available storage, such as encompassed through calcium dynamics) on the other. The ensuing transcriptional outputs and functional changes of proteins realize a constant modification of physiological and biophysical parameters affecting signaling transmission.

The uncertainty minimization employed by the cells as dictated by Bayesian inference [20] predicts that random (and hence unpredictable) dynamic stimulation will elicit a stronger but less directed cellular physiological and transcriptional response than a regular, predictable dynamic stimulation, resulting in an aversion to irregular environments and preference for more regular ones [28]. Specifically, this idea has been developed in a rich body of work on surprise minimization [22, 24, 29-31] which emphasizes the drive of living beings to continuously improve their internal models of their environments and of themselves. These ideas are frequently discussed with respect to neural brain mechanisms; however, given the wide conservation of signaling mechanisms and algorithms across


[PAGE 6] 
neural and non-neural cells [32, 33], it becomes especially interesting to ask whether systems with no brains, and no neurons, can likewise support expectations about the future born of pattern inference, and exhibit responses which reveal that these expectations cannot be met in random environments.

Here, we test the hypothesis that aneural organisms can display actionable pattern recognition in general and uncertainty minimization in particular. We chose to investigate this using the photoadaptive response in two different subspecies of the chlorophyte green algae Volvox (Volvox carteri and Volvox aureus) as a readily measurable adaptive behavior to an external physical stimulus that can be varied in any temporal pattern. We simulated different light stimulation patterns (including crucially randomized ones) in our model and tested their predictions for variable effect on phototactic modulation in Volvox. We designed an experimental platform that allows us to compare Volvox phototaxis towards two distinct regimes of light stimuli with different patterns of light pulsation, exploring mechanisms and long-term effects on the organism. We complement the phototactic trajectories obtained from these experiments with gain-of-function drug experiments focused on shifting phototactic biases based on both our knowledge of underlying molecular pathways and their effect on their information processing modalities. We furthermore also tested whether Volvox exhibit short-term memory towards past light stimuli in terms of their phototactic paths, which would provide them with further crucial neural-like capabilities. We also tested whether Volvox' photosynthesis would also be affected by dynamic light patterns in an attempt to detect metabolic manifestations of uncertainty minimization in Volvox. Finally, to begin exploring the potential for training of Volvox photoaxis to desired light pattern biases, we examined whether patterned electric shocks could manipulate Volvox responses to patterned light stimuli. Taken together, our results reveal capacities which would not normally be expected in algae and provide a proof-of-concept for searching for such capacities in a wide range of minimal and synthetic model systems.


[PAGE 7] 2 Methods

2.1 Culture Conditions and Strains
Volvox carteri eve strain (female) was obtained from Bradley J. S. C. Olsen Lab and grown in either Standard Volvox Media (SVM) or AlgaGro®. Both strains are incubated in a Peltier cooled incubator (catalogue number 3915FL) at 30°C under a 14-hour light and 10-hour dark cycle (Jiménez-Marín et al, 2021). A 75W LED Grow Panel (model number HY-MD-D169-S-75W-RB-US) was used inside the incubator to maintain the light and dark cycle. SVM media is prepped following previously tested recipe by the Olson lab (2017). AlgaGro® medium is purchased in 50x concentrate form from Carolina (catalog number 153758) and diluted in Poland Spring water per instructions from the manufacturer. Every time new Volvox are used for experiments, the entire culture flask is gently mixed and placed in front of a light source for at least 5 minutes to allow active Volvox to move to one side of the flask for easy collection of 1-2 milliliter of between 500 and 2000 viable Volvox colonies.

2.2 Light-Stimulation Apparatus and Imaging
Initial experiments with Volvox aureus were done in ABS plastic chambers printed by a Fused Deposition Modeling (FDM) 3D printer, with clear polystyrene plastic glued to the sides for light access. Light Stimulation was achieved using standard through hole blue LEDs (from Mouser Electronics, catalog number 630-HLMP-CB1A-XY0DD) with a wavelength of 470 nm and an opening angle of 15 degrees, controlled with an LED driver from Thorlabs (part number: LEDD1B), dialed to power output 1mm from the LED of 2mW. To calibrate the LEDs to equal outputs, LEDs were pre-sorted to similar outputs, then soldered into a parallel circuit with a potentiometer in series with every individual LED. Then, light intensity was measured using a photometer probe at 2 distances, right at the LED and at 6cm away from it, after which angle of the LED and resistance of the potentiometer were adjusted to achieve a good match of intensities from row to row, as well as from side to side.

Quantification in this setup was achieved through collection of Volvox colonies in the different sections with subsequent manual counting using still images of the collected colony ensembles. Plots of phototactic biases using the setup shown in Figure 1 only consider the approximate position of Volvox in the end sections of the chambers which show a more pronounced bias due to the length of the chamber when compared to the second setup shown in Figure 2 which allows for less swimming back and forth of Volvox.

All light experiments performed on Volvox carteri used SK9822 individually addressable RGB LEDs with total light outputs above the LED at 2mW each. Light patterns were programmed using Arduino Nano Controllers. Housings for adaptive cultures were printed with ventilation holes reaching from underneath upwards between LEDs and cultures flasks to aid in heat distribution. Phototactic experiments were performed with only the blue light from the LED at 460 nm, while growth experiments and oxygen measurements were performed at both blue and red (650 nm) light to match incubator conditions.

Using the MCAM Gigapixel Multi-Camera array of 24 cameras, up to 48 individual chambers (2 per camera) can be observed at high spatio-temporal resolution simultaneously with individual light pattern stimulation for each chamber. 3d printed clear dual chambers with an optically opaque divider inserted between the two chamber halves to reduce light contamination from the sides are inserted into the device for experiments with Volvox and are removable. Autofluorescence of Volvox was detected at peak wavelength of 695 nm using a near IR long pass filter a passthrough wavelength of 685 nm, where the excitation light was the blue light from the LED light at 460 nm.


[PAGE 9] 2.3 Computational Tracking and Analysis
To analyze the movement of Volvox, a python (version 3.10) program was created that utilizes the trackpy library (version 0.4.2, https://soft-matter.github.io/trackpy/v0.4.2/) to track the particle trajectories. The program takes in multiple parameters including, but not limited to, the following: size, speed, and integrated light intensity of each Volvox colony, x and y midpoints of the chamber, and number of Volvox colonies. Additionally, the program can adjust for Volvox that are stationary during most of the tracking, so that they can be counted separately for further analysis, or excluded in the counting analysis to remove Volvox that are stuck to a surface due to their flagella getting caught to imperfections on the chamber surface. As these imperfections have been reduced heavily by sanding and clear coating of the chambers, this only applies to a small proportion of Volvox and no bias towards different light patterns was observed, as the mechanism is unrelated to the light. The program then takes the filtered information and counts how many Volvox are in each half of the chamber.

[PAGE 9] Figure 2. Apparatus and Workflow for Manual Counting of Phototactic Biases.
a) Individually controllable blue LEDs in 48 chambers were pulsed in different light. b) Quantification of Volvox phototactic bias was performed based on computational tracking of the images acquired with the MCAM camera array above the chamber. The different colors of the tracks indicate the swimming trajectories of individual Volvox colonies, while the shaded areas in green and magenta on the right indicate the two halves of the chambers closer to either of the two opposing light sources, such as a fixed 1 Hz light pulse frequency, color coded throughout this paper in green, versus a randomized light pulse sequence, color coded throughout this paper in magenta.


[PAGE 10] 2.4 Electric-Shock Treatment

2.4.1 Chamber Configuration
A 3d printed 30mm x 20mm x2mm chamber as shown above was resin printed. 0.5-millimeter (diameter) platinum iridium wire (catalog number AA10056BS) electrodes were inserted through holes printed on either side of the chamber allowing 1 millimeter of the electrode to be exposed within the active area of the chamber. An additional chamber stage was printed to act as a holder for a strip of LED lights. The lights were controlled through an Arduino microcontroller, with programs determining the intensity of light.

2.4.2 Voltage and Current Control
Initial voltage source used for preliminary, constant voltage testing was a DC laboratory DC power supply, model: GPS-1830D. This was strictly used as a voltage source, while the LED Driver was used to modulate current. For the LED driver (part number LEDD1B), the current limit was set at 0.2 Amps and dialed until the voltage in the chamber was measured at the desired level, then balanced with resistors in parallel to lower the actual current going through the chamber to non-destructive levels. Measurements were done using a multimeter. An Arduino Nano microcontroller was used to modulate the current.

[PAGE 11] 2.5 Oxygen Measurements
We used the Firesting® apparatus from pyrotechnics, which measures oxygen concentration in a vial in gaseous or aqueous form by scanning an oxygen sensitive sensor spot inside the glass vial from the outside with an optical fiber probe. Volvox cultures were expanded 2 days before start of treatment into 4 flasks of 200 ml each, then, before start of treatment, combined in a conical tube, gently inverted to thoroughly mix the cultures, and then separated into 4 new flasks. One was left as control in the incubator, while the other 3 were exposed to light in dome-shaped 3d printed devices with inbuild LEDs with ventilation holes on the bottom, and open space towards the top of the culture flask, but shielding the culture flasks form the rest of the incubator lights during treatment. Oxygen measurements were taken before treatment, and then after 6, 24, 30, and 48 hours respectively by slowly and gently swirling each flask to mix the media but not to agitate and add more oxygen, then gently and extremely slowly transferring 5ml using a Pasteur pipette of one culture into the oxygen measurement vial with a temperature probe in it for temperature compensation of oxygen concentration measurement.


[PAGE 12] 3 Results

[PAGE 12] 3.1 Volvox Distinguish Between Patterned and Random Light Stimuli
To investigate the ability of Volvox to detect and differentially react to temporal light patterns, we designed 3D-printed chambers of different sizes, consisting of isolated channels with clear ends, each end illuminated by a separately microcontrolled LED, with manual counting (Figure 1) and camera-based tracking (Figure 2). Based on our central hypothesis of surprise minimization in aneural organisms, we tested the prediction that a phototactic organism such as Volvox would reveal a preference for order (or a dislike of unpredictability) by preferentially moving towards light stimulation patterns of higher regularity (and hence predictability). When we exposed Volvox to an overall equal amount of light over time but at a regular, fixed light pulse interval versus a randomized, irregular light pattern (see Figure 3), a significantly larger proportion of Volvox aureus were detected in the section adjacent to the fixed interval stimulation than in the section adjacent to the random stimulation (p<0.05, Wilcoxon signed-rank test), in accordance with our predictions based on uncertainty minimization.

Because of this observed preferential movement of Volvox aureus to the regular 1 Hz light pattern when opposed with a randomized light pulse pattern of similar average pulse length, we conclude that Volvox can distinguish patterned light stimuli from random ones, a fundamental building block for intelligent information processing [34, 35].

To minimize sources of error and bias from manually counting Volvox and to get real-time data on Volvox photoadaptation for downstream data-mining, we also designed and tested a system that combines highly transparent smaller chambers (reducing the effect of light scattering) with a high-resolution camera system. We used this apparatus to test the same hypothesis on another species of Volvox, V. carteri, which is evolutionarily distant from V. aureus by an estimated 75 million years [36].

Our results in this automated platform show that, as for V. aureus, V. carteri also exhibits a photoadaptive bias towards a regular light pulse pattern vs. a random one (see Figure 3a), as over time, more Volvox swam closer to the patterned stimulus side than to the randomized stimulus side (p<0.01).


[PAGE 13] Figure 3. Photoadaptation in Volvox carteri and aureus Exhibits as Bias Against Randomized Light Pulses.
Volvox carteri and aureus prefer fixed (1Hz, 0.5s light duration) over random light pulse series.
a) Volvox carteri phototactic bias was quantified as indicated in Figure 2. Plotted are the average x (along the major axis of the chamber) position in percent relative to the chamber width for each experiment. (*** indicates p<0.001, Wilcoxon signed-rank test).
b) Phototactic preference in Volvox aureus was measured by counting of Volvox colonies that were collected in one end of the well versus the other (see Figure 2), after which average x position was approximated in the same manner as in a). A significantly larger proportion of Volvox aureus was detected in the section closer to the fixed interval stimulus than the randomized stimulus. (* indicates p<0.05, Wilcoxon signed-rank test).

We exploited the detailed quantitative nature of this imaging apparatus to investigate the influence of Volvox colony size (µm), swimming speed and the number of colonies inside the chamber on its phototactic bias using a Principal Component Analysis (PCA) analysis. The PCA revealed that the first two principal components accounted for 91.07% of the total variance in the data, with PC1 explaining 56.72% and PC2 explaining 34.35%. The third component, PC3, accounted for the remaining 8.94% of the variance. The component loadings for each variable are presented in Table 1.


[PAGE 14] The strong positive loading for both Volvox colony size and swimming speed in PC1 suggest a robust positive correlation between these two variables, indicating that larger Volvox colonies tend to swim at higher speeds in our system. This relationship could be attributed to the increased propulsive force generated by larger colonies with more flagellated cells. The strong negative loading for the number of colonies per frame in PC2 suggests that this component appears to represent colony density, largely independent of size and speed. The moderate negative loading for speed on this component suggests a slight tendency for lower swimming speeds in frames with higher colony counts, possibly due to increased hydrodynamic or direct flagellar interactions, leading to Volvox colonies getting stuck to each other temporarily. PC3, while only explaining 8.94% of the variance, revealed an interesting contrast between colony size and swimming speed. This minor component might capture exceptions to the main trend, possibly representing scenarios where larger colonies move more slowly or smaller colonies move more quickly and could be related to variations in colony morphology, flagellar activity, or local environmental conditions. The high cumulative variance explained by PC1 and PC2 (91.07%) indicates that the three-dimensional data can be effectively represented in two dimensions with minimal loss of information. This suggests a strong underlying structure in the Volvox population dynamics, primarily driven by the size-speed relationship and variations in colony density.

Based on this analysis, we filtered Volvox by size (colony diameter between 120 and 150µm) and swimming speeds (larger than 120 µm/s) for higher uniformity and standardization of our data. Thus, the most effective distinction between the random and patterned stimuli was being carried out by Volvox of that size and swimming speed.


[PAGE 15] 3.2 Volvox Show Optimal Photoadaptation to Specific Frequencies

We next examined which light pulse frequencies, if any, Volvox most readily adapt to – by exposing Volvox inside the channel to different light pulse frequencies on each side of the chamber. We tested various pulse frequencies from 50Hz to 1Hz and determined the percent of Volvox that swam to each end of the chamber (see Figure 4). There was a clear preferential adaptive response to light pulse frequencies of 2 Hz when opposed to smaller and larger pulse frequencies respectively (p<0.001 as determined by Wilcoxon signed-rank test). From this we conclude that Volvox distinguish different regular patterns in terms of their adaptive, phototactic response.

Using the automated tracking apparatus, we also tested the presence of a phototactic biases in Volvox carteri for the highly significant case of 1 Hz vs. 2 Hz in Volvox aureus. However, unlike in V. aureus (see Figure 4), in V. carteri there was no difference between photoadaptive responses to either opposing light stimuli of 1 and 2 Hz respectively. We only compared two frequencies, so it is very possible that photoadaptation in V. carteri is optimized to a different frequency range than in V. aureus, possibly due to a slightly different flagellar response times or an overall rotational speed difference compared to V. aureus. These differences would need to be investigated in future studies, as no such detailed studies have been done in Volvox aureus.

The data from section 3.1 on the patterned vs. randomized light sequences, combined with these data on different light pulse frequencies in two similarly simple aneural species, support the hypothesis that even aneural organisms can detect patterns and tend to avoid random stimulation patterns precisely because of the difference in overall predictability of those stimulation patterns, and not just due to differences in frequency.


[PAGE 16] Figure 4. Photoadaptation in Volvox aureus and carteri is Optimized for Different Specific Light Frequencies.
a) No significant phototactic bias was observed between 1 Hz vs. 2Hz stimuli for V. carteri.
b) For V. Aureus however a very significant (*** indicates p<0.001, Wilcoxon signed-rank test) bias was observed towards the 2 Hz side, indicating a difference in photoresponse between the 2 species. 
c) Different light pulse frequency pairings reveal a lack of biases in frequencies higher and lower than 1-2 Hz, while a stronger bias towards 2 Hz was observed against 10 Hz, indicating a window of optimal photoadaptation in V. Aureus towards 2Hz.


[PAGE 17] 3.3 Simulation Using a Cellular Scale in silico Model of Volvox Response to Random vs. Patterned Inputs Predicts that Uncertain Inputs Decrease Photoadaptation

In order to probe how uncertainty minimization is implemented mechanistically on a physiological level, we built on work by Drescher et al. [15], to simulate the adaptive phototactic response of V. carteri to the same types of input used in our experimental system above (Figures 1,2). We simulated flagellum beating speed downregulation in response to inputs reflecting fixed vs. randomized light pulse stimulations with similar average interval length and equal total light exposure. The average adaptive or recovery time (the time it takes for a flagellum to return to baseline beating frequency after photostimulation) obtained for the irregular, randomized light input series was greatly reduced (see Figure 5e). This was evidenced by the reduced time it took for simulated fluid speed induced by flagellar beating to return towards baseline following the random pulse sequence compared to the fixed pulse sequence (Figure 5c). Given the ubiquity of Poisson distributed neuronal activation patterns in neural organisms [37], we confirmed that when we randomized inputs by shuffling stimulation pulses (which constrained each stimulation to yield similar average pulse duration and equal total light exposure), the histogram of inter-pulse durations exhibited a Poisson distribution (see Figure 5f), which is the distribution most used to model natural pulsed stimulation patterns in human brains [37] to avoid adaptation through habituation to repeated stimuli. As seen below, this opens up research on short term adaptation in Volvox as a foundation for learning, as Poisson type stimulation patterns have been shown to evoke distinct spike timing dependent plasticity (STDP) in neurons [38]. In other words, neural systems react very differently to purely random Poisson distributed spike trains versus tightly regulated, repeatable activation patterns, the balance thereof being an active source for debate and likely varies in different neuronal systems depending on how tightly information is compressed at each level [39, 40].


[PAGE 19] 3.4 Temporal Selectivity of Volvox Photoadaptation is Altered by a Calcium Channel Blocker Targeting Primarily Internal Calcium Channels

We next investigated the mechanism underlying the temporal preferences we observed in phototactic outcomes both in silico and in vivo. First, we characterized how components integral to the modularity of the adaptive photoresponse (i.e., light activation and recovery time of downregulated flagellar beating speed) are implemented in Volvox. While initial calcium entry upon light activation occurs on the order of 19 milliseconds in this organism [41], its diffusion across the flagella has been estimated to take 0.2 seconds [15], a duration we can observe experimentally. We used nimodipine, a reagent commonly used to selectively inhibit calcium signaling [42, 43], and was previously shown in the close Volvox relative Chlamydomonas to bind to a calcium inhibitor binding protein localized primarily in the cell-internal membrane [44].


[PAGE 20] This enabled us to observe the adaptive response of Volvox to light inputs in real time during inhibition of signaling from the photoreceptor to the flagella (Figure 6). As blocking calcium this way slows down the calcium mediated signal progression from photoreceptor towards flagella and thereby causing a decrease in phototactic sensitivity [44], we can describe this effect in Volvox as an increase in the photoresponse time τ, introduced earlier. Note that we shifted the speed filtering criteria for both normal and nimodipine containing media for lower speeds, as nimodipine also reduced overall speeds as a consequence of lowered phototactic sensitivity.

We tested whether such a decrease in internal calcium flow rates causes a shift in frequency dependence of phototactic preference. We found that in the presence of nimodipine, Volvox showed a significant phototactic bias towards the 2 Hz stimulus compared to the 1 Hz, while preference for the 1Hz regular stimulus compared to the random pulse sequence reversed. To explain this phenomenon, we turned back to the simulations from section 3.3, and simulated the fluid speed induced by flagellar beating in response to the same 2Hz frequency as before, but this time, to simulate the effect of nimodipine, we increased response time τř by an arbitrary factor of 5 (exact value would need experimental validation through high speed imaging of flagellar activity and fluid flow in response to the drug).

We found that while the overall exponential fit was not too different from Figure 5e, the deceased response time reduces the overall amplitude of variation over the mean fluid response, making it more similar in shape to the regular step function. Using an analogy to human vision, this corresponds to shifting the high frequency light input below a flicker fusion rate (the rate at which an intermittent light stimulus is perceived as constant) the Volvox can perceive. While the response time was still reduced overall, the reduction in variations may mean there are fewer downstream influences that interfere with normal Volvox phototaxis. This suggests that inhibition of calcium release and diffusion shifts the sensed base frequency of the interval lengths that Volvox can perceive, akin to a flicker fusion rate in human vision, denoting a maximal light flickering frequency the human vision can no longer perceive as individual pulses.


[PAGE 21] 3.5 Volvox Exhibit Memory Persistence Towards Past Light Direction

A necessary condition for pattern recognition and tracking over time is the persistence of a stimulus' effect on its internal state over a limited amount of time – a type of memory. To prove the existence of such a persistence of effect in Volvox, we designed an experiment to test if phototactic alignment of Volvox towards one stimulus persists after that stimulus ends. We used the experimental platform described in Figure 1b and confined Volvox aureus into a 1 cm space at the center of the channel using transparent dividers and then illuminated them from one side with blue LED light for 5 minutes, after which we turned the light source off and allowed the Volvox colonies to travel freely for 10 minutes, collecting the Volvox at each section in the well as before. There was a significant (p<0.05, Wilcoxon signed-rank test) bias towards the previously illuminated side of the well, indicating persistence of phototactic alignment (Figure 7).

A likely mechanism of this persistence of effect is a sufficient combination of initial orientation of the Volvox colony towards light stimulus and a maintenance of that orientation over short time scales even in the presence of small-scale perturbations.

It is already known that the first part of that combination occurs: Volvox orient themselves towards light by virtue of the asymmetric distribution of photoreceptor activity along their sphere and flagellar orientation [15]. The fact that in our experiment, Volvox were still preferentially distributed towards the light stimulus ten minutes after it ends is evidence for the swimming orientation in Volvox being stabilized when a light stimulus is removed, which is why our result is a first evidence of short term memory in Volvox.


[PAGE 22] 3.6 Photosynthesis Efficiency is Not Significantly Affected by Randomized Light Pulses Compared to the Fixed Frequency Light Stimulation Pattern

Next we wanted to find out whether Volvox photosynthesis was also affected by different light patterns, especially unpredictable ones, to test the hypothesis that the mechanism by which Volvox detect patterns vs. randomness involved monitoring of energy generation, and also whether such patterned or random light stimulation would interfere with normal Volvox growth. We quantified photosynthetic efficiency using the Firesting™ (Pyrotechnics) to measure oxygen concentrations, using an external optical fiber probe to scan an oxygen-sensitive sensor inside glass vials containing Volvox. Because the individual sensors are highly sensitive to temperature and media conditions and are not stable in normal Volvox culturing conditions over longer times, we were limited to taking measurements at individual timepoints and used a temperature probe inside the vial for temperature compensation. Measuring oxygen concentrations at two timepoints per day, one in the morning and one in the evening, we observed that oxygen levels in the media rose significantly in the continuous light treatment (our positive control) but not in either the randomized light pulse group, or the fixed light pulse series treatment (our negative control).

Because in both experimental conditions, the light was off for 50% of the exposure, we expected a significant decrease in photosynthesis, which was however not detectable with the statistical power of our experiment. The lack of significant difference between the fixed and random light pulse conditions suggests that random pattern avoidance in Volvox did not evolve simply to maximize energy but is instead a core feature of the way they process their environment.


[PAGE 24] 3.7 Volvox Adapt to Long Term Exposure of Patterned Culture Light

We next wanted to investigate the ability of Volvox to adapt in the long term, rather than just in the short term as above, to the same patterned and random light conditions in their culturing environment in time frames close to evolutionary time scales. We asked whether Volvox would adjust their preferences in the long-term, by exposing Volvox to the different light conditions for 2 years and then remeasuring their phototactic biases as above.

The result was that Volvox exposed to either, randomized or 1 Hz light pulse frequency, no longer exhibited a phototactic bias towards the 1 Hz stimulus side (see Figure 9a). This change was not however accompanied by a shift in biases between 1 Hz and 2 Hz stimuli, as differences in biases in these graphs remained non-significant (see Figure 9b).

This remarkable finding takes the short-term adaptation of the earlier sections on phototactic biases and short-term memory (all in the scale of minutes) to much more long term changes at the population level in the order of months to years.


[PAGE 25] 3.8 Patterned Electric Shocks Interfere with Photoadaptation

Next, we examined the effect of a different kind of uncertainty-induced stress on photoadaptation. Unpredictable electric shocks have been widely used to increase stress in neural organisms experimentally. A 2016 study in human participants by Berker et al. found high correlation between stress responses, measured through physiological changes including pupil diameter and skin conductance, and environmental uncertainty [45]. Linking stress and uncertainty from the external environment could help organisms more quickly adapt to their changing environments providing an advantage both during the organism's lifetime and evolutionarily. However, increased stress as a response to unpredictable environmental stimuli has not been studied much in simpler, aneural organisms, particularly when light and electricity are used as the stimuli.

To assess the effect of random electric shocks on photoadaptation, we used a 30mm chamber in which the light axis and electric current axis were perpendicularly paired. Dynamic lights were used with the light source switching between the top and bottom of the chamber every 60 seconds. The top lights were engaged for 60 seconds and then completely turned off while the bottom lights were on for 60 seconds. The switching lights provided more opportunities to observe phototactic behavior and ensured that Volvox would not be directed towards and get stuck at one side. To ensure that there was no physical bias, the stage holding the chamber was leveled and the light intensity of each LED was measured and adjusted to achieve equal brightness output for the top and bottom lights.

When current was applied to the chamber in a continuous fashion, Volvox colonies exhibited consistent phototactic behavior over the course of the whole ten minutes. The Volvox colonies started moving towards the light source strongly as seen by the increase in Volvox in the top quartile.


[PAGE 27] As the light source location changed, the Volvox then moved more towards the bottom, as seen by the decrease in Volvox in the top quartile and an increase in the number of Volvox in the bottom quartile. While the number of Volvox in the top of the chamber peaked at 100 seconds, and then declined slightly, phototaxis clearly continued throughout the treatment.

We next exposed Volvox to dynamic light stimuli and fixed frequencies of electric current. At first, the behavior was similar to that seen with continuous current; however, after 150 seconds there was a large drop in the maximum number of Volvox able to move back to the top of the