[PAGE 1] DRUGS FOR TREATING
NEURODEVELOPMENTAL DISORDERS

ABSTRACT
The present disclosure provides compositions and methods
for treating neurodevelopmental disorders, such as Rett
syndrome and cyclin-dependent kinase-like 5 (CDKL5)
deficiency disorder.

[PAGE 3] DRUGS FOR TREATING
NEURODEVELOPMENTAL DISORDERS

RELATED APPLICATION

[0001] This application is a national stage filing under 35
U.S.C. § 371 of international patent application number
PCT/US2022/030372, filed May 20, 2022, which claims the
benefit under 35 U.S.C. § 119 (c) of U.S. provisional
application Ser. No. 63/191,821, filed May 21, 2021, the
content of each of which is incorporated by reference herein
in its entirety.

[PAGE 3] BACKGROUND

[0002] Rett syndrome (RTT), a neurodevelopmental dis-
order that primarily affects females is typically characterized
by loss of language skills and hand use, impaired or absent
gait, dyspraxia, cognitive deficits, stereotyped behaviors,
seizures, and autonomic irregularities including respiratory
and gastrointestinal (GI) dysfunction and premature osteo-
porosis and osteopenia (Hagberg et al. Ment. Retard. Dev.
Disabil. Res. Rev. 2002; 8:61-65; Operto et al. Brain Behav.
2019; 9: e01250). Mutations in the X-linked gene encoding
MECP2 (methyl-CpG-binding protein 2) account for
90-95% of the case of classic Rett syndrome (RTT) (Neul et
al. Neuroscientist. 2004; 10:118-128; Neul et al. Neurology.
2008; 70:1313-1321) while mutations in the X-linked gene
encoding cyclin-dependent kinase-like 5 (CDKL5) account
from some cases of atypical RTT that manifest with early
refractory epilepsy (Olson et al. Pediatr. Neurol. 2019;
97:18-25). CDKL5 deficiency disorder (CDD) has overlap-
ping phenotypic features with RTT including seizures and
developmental delays, GI dysfunction, scoliosis, limited or
absent speech, and sleep disturbances. However, individuals
with CDD exhibit severe developmental delay from birth
and seizure onset before the age of 3 months (Fehr et al.
Neurology. 2016; 87:2206-2213; Fehr et al. Eur. J. Hum.
Genet. 2013; 21:266-273). Seizures and sleep disturbances
are more common in CDD than in RTT, whereas features of
regression and spinal curvature are less common in those
with CDKL5 mutations compared to those with MECP2
mutations (Fehr et al. Eur. J. Hum. Genet. 2013; 21:266-273;
Tarquinio et al. Brain. 2017; 140:306-318).
[0003] While some treatments for RTT and CDD are in
clinical trials, nearly all were not designed explicitly for the
genetic disorder but rather are being repositioned based on
clinical endpoint similarity to previously-tested indications
and have demonstrated only mild efficacy. Additionally,
since the predominant endpoint being pursued has been
seizures and some neuromuscular deficiencies, other aspects
of RTT and CDD, including gastrointestinal tract and
inflammatory disruptions, are still in need of a concerted
therapeutic effort.

[PAGE 3] SUMMARY

[0004] Some aspects of the present disclosure provide a
method of treating a symptom of Rett syndrome in a subject
in need thereof, the method comprising administering to the
subject a therapeutically effective amount of vorinostat.
[0005] In some embodiments, the subject administered
vorinostat has been diagnosed with Rett syndrome.
[0006] In some embodiments, the vorinostat is formulated
with hydroxypropyl B-cyclodextrin. In some embodiments,
the amount of vorinostat is effective to reduce anxiety in the
subject, relative to a control. In some embodiments, the
amount of vorinostat is effective to improve Rett syndrome
scoring of the subject, relative to a control. In some embodi-
ments, the amount of vorinostat is effective to decrease
inflammation (e.g., inflammation in the gastrointestinal
tract) in the subject, relative to a control. In some embodi-
ments, the amount of vorinostat is effective reduce, inhibit,
or reverse ciliary dysfunction in the subject, relative to a
control.
[0007] In some embodiments, the amount of vorinostat is
lower than the amount of vorinostat approved by the U.S.
Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for the treatment of
cutaneous T cell lymphoma (CTCL).
[0008] In some embodiments, the vorinostat is adminis-
tered to the subject in combination with one or more of
ivermectin, trofinetide, and Bacteroides fragilis or a poly-
saccharide isolated from Bacteroides fragilis.
[0009] Yet other aspects of the present disclosure provide
a method of treating a symptom of Rett syndrome in a
subject in need thereof, the method comprising administer-
ing to the subject a therapeutically effective amount of
ivermectin.
[0010] In some embodiments, the subject administered
ivermectin has been diagnosed with Rett syndrome.
[0011] In some embodiments, the amount of ivermectin is
effective to reduce or inhibit seizures in the subject.
[0012] In some embodiments, the ivermectin is adminis-
tered to the subject in combination with one or more of
vorinostat, trofinetide, and Bacteroides fragilis or a poly-
saccharide isolated from Bacteroides fragilis.
[0013] Still other aspects of the present disclosure provide
a method of treating a symptom of Rett syndrome in a
subject in need thereof, the method comprising administer-
ing to the subject a therapeutically effective amount of
Bacteroides fragilis or a polysaccharide isolated from Bacte-
roides fragilis.
[0014] In some embodiments, the subject administered
Bacteroides fragilis or a polysaccharide isolated from Bacte-
roides fragilis has been diagnosed with Rett syndrome. In
some embodiments, the Bacteroides fragilis is Bacteroides
fragilis 9343. In some embodiments, the method comprises
administering to the subject a therapeutically effective
amount of Bacteroides fragilis. In some embodiments, the
method comprises administering to the subject a therapeu-
tically effective amount of a polysaccharide isolated from
Bacteroides fragilis. In some embodiments, the polysaccha-
ride is polysaccharide A (PSA). In some embodiments, the
polysaccharide is polysaccharide B (PSB).
[0015] In some embodiments, the Bacteroides fragilis or a
polysaccharide isolated from Bacteroides fragilis is admin-
istered to the subject in combination with one or more of
vorinostat, ivermectin, and trofinetide.
[0016] Some aspects of the present disclosure provide a
method of treating a symptom of CDKL5 deficiency disor-
der in a subject in need thereof, the method comprising
administering to the subject a therapeutically effective
amount of vorinostat.
[0017] In some embodiments, the subject administered
vorinostat has been diagnosed with CDKL5 deficiency dis-
order.
[0018] In some embodiments, the vorinostat is formulated
with hydroxypropyl B-cyclodextrin.
[0019] In some embodiments, the amount of vorinostat is
effective to reduce anxiety in the subject, relative to a
[PAGE 4] control. In some embodiments, the amount of vorinostat is
effective to decrease inflammation (e.g., inflammation in the
gastrointestinal tract) in the subject, relative to a control. In
some embodiments, the amount of vorinostat is effective
reduce, inhibit, or reverse ciliary dysfunction in the subject,
relative to a control.
[0020] In some embodiments, the vorinostat is adminis-
tered in combination with one or more of ivermectin,
trofinetide, and Bacteroides fragilis or a polysaccharide
isolated from Bacteroides fragilis.
[0021] Other aspects of the present disclosure provide a
method of treating a symptom of CDKL5 deficiency disor-
der in a subject in need thereof, the method comprising
administering to the subject a therapeutically effective
amount of ivermectin.
[0022] In some embodiments, the subject administered
ivermectin has been diagnosed with CDKL5 deficiency
disorder.
[0023] In some embodiments, the amount of ivermectin is
effective to reduce or inhibit seizures in the subject.
[0024] In some embodiments, the ivermectin is adminis-
tered in combination with one or more of vorinostat, trofi-
netide, and Bacteroides fragilis or a polysaccharide isolated
from Bacteroides fragilis.
[0025] Still other aspects of the present disclosure provide
a method of treating a symptom of CDKL5 deficiency
disorder in a subject in need thereof, the method comprising
administering to the subject a therapeutically effective
amount of trofinetide.
[0026] In some embodiments, the subject administered
trofinetide has been diagnosed with CDKL5 deficiency
disorder.
[0027] In some embodiments, the amount of trofinetide is
effective to reduce or inhibit seizures in the subject.
[0028] In some embodiments, the trofinetide is adminis-
tered in combination with one or more of vorinostat, iver-
mectin, and Bacteroides fragilis or a polysaccharide isolated
from Bacteroides fragilis.
[0029] Further aspects of the present disclosure provide a
method of treating a symptom of CDKL5 deficiency disor-
der in a subject in need thereof, the method comprising
administering to the subject a therapeutically effective
amount of Bacteroides fragilis or a polysaccharide isolated
from Bacteroides fragilis.
[0030] In some embodiments, the subject administered
Bacteroides fragilis or a polysaccharide isolated from Bacte-
roides fragilis has been diagnosed with CDKL5 deficiency
disorder. In some embodiments, the Bacteroides fragilis is
Bacteroides fragilis 9343. In some embodiments, the
method comprises administering to the subject a therapeu-
tically effective amount of Bacteroides fragilis. In some
embodiments, the method comprises administering to the
subject a therapeutically effective amount of a polysaccha-
ride isolated from Bacteroides fragilis. In some embodi-
ments, the polysaccharide is PSA. In some embodiments,
the polysaccharide is PSB. In some embodiments, the poly-
saccharide is as described in Zheng, L. et. al., Capsular
Polysaccharide From Bacteroides fragilis Protects Against
Ulcerative Colitis in an Undegraded Form. Front. Pharma-
col., 7 Dec. 2020 doi.org/10.3389/fphar.2020.570476.
[0031] In some embodiments, the Bacteroides fragilis or a
polysaccharide isolated from Bacteroides fragilis is admin-
istered in combination with one or more of vorinostat,
ivermectin, and trofinetide.
[0032] In some embodiments, the vorinostat is adminis-
tered weekly, daily, or multiple times a day. In some embodi-
ments, the ivermectin is administered weekly, daily, or
multiple times a day. In some embodiments, the trofinetide
is administered weekly, daily, or multiple times a day. In
some embodiments, the Bacteroides fragilis or a polysac-
charide isolated from Bacteroides fragilis is administered
weekly, daily, or multiple times a day.
[0033] Other aspects of the present disclosure provide a
method of treating a symptom of a neurodevelopmental
disorder in a subject in need thereof, the method comprising
administering to the subject a therapeutically effective
amount of an agent of Table 1.
[0034] In some embodiments, the neurodevelopmental
disorder is Rett syndrome. In other embodiments, the neu-
rodevelopmental disorder is CDKL5 deficiency disorder.
[0035] Also provided herein are pharmaceutical composi-
tions comprising (a) two or more of vorinostat, ivermectin,
trofinetide, and Bacteroides fragilis or a polysaccharide
isolated from Bacteroides fragilis and (b) a pharmaceuti-
cally acceptable excipient. In some embodiments, the
excipient is hydroxypropyl B-cyclodextrin.

[PAGE 4] BRIEF DESCRIPTION OF THE DRAWINGS

[0036] FIGS. 1A-1B are graphs showing baseline MeCP2
protein expression in forebrain and midbrain (FIG. 1A), and
olfactory multiciliated cells (FIG. 1B) of MeCP2 knock-
down Xenopus laevis and in wild-type control Xenopus
laevis.
[0037] FIG. 1C is a graph showing baseline MeCP2 RNA
expression in the brain and gastrointestinal (GI) tract of
MeCP2 knockdown Xenopus laevis and in wild-type control
Xenopus laevis.
[0038] FIGS. 2A-2C are graphs showing that treatment
with vorinostat reverses hyper-acetylation of microtubules
and alpha-tubulin in olfactory multi-ciliated cells in Xenopus
laevis tadpoles. FIG. 3A is a graph showing that treatment
with vorinostat in Xenopus laevis restores normal tongue
vertical thickness in MeCP2 knockdown animals.
[0039] FIG. 3B is a graph showing that treatment with
vorinostat in Xenopus laevis restores normal ib4+ expression
in the GI tract in MeCP2 knockdown animals.
[0040] FIGS. 4A-4B are a graphs of data from an MeCP2
injected Xenopus laevis tadpole drug screen, showing Sei-
zure Score (FIG. 4A) and Rating Score (FIG. 4B). Key Data:
FIG. 4A: Buffer-Injected Control, MecP2-Untreated
Control, Trofinetide (70 µg/mL), Trofinetide (140 µg/mL),
Sirolimus (30 µM), Vorinostat (25 µM), Vorinostat (50 µM),
and Ivermectin (0.1 µM) shown left to right on the graph
respectively; FIG. 4B: B. fragilis (10º CFU/mL) and clo-
zapine (5 µM).
[0041] FIGS. 5A-5B are graphs showing Seizure Score
data for wild-type (FIG. 5A) and MeCP2 knockdown (FIG.
5B) Xenopus laevis tadpoles treated with drug (trofinetide or
vorinostat) or vehicle from Day 1 to Day 6, after which they
were placed back in medium.
[0042] FIGS. 6A-6B are graphs showing that vorinostat
improves Xenopus laevis tadpole viability in the MeCP2
knockdown model.
[0043] FIG. 7A shows the experimental design for the
MeCP2 knockdown mouse studies.
[0044] FIGS. 7B-7E show Cumulative Severity Score
(FIG. 7B), Fold Change from Initial Weight (FIG. 7C),
Elevated Plus Maze (EPM) performance and Enhanced
[PAGE 5] Spatial Novelty Y-Maze performance (FIG. 7D), and Diar-
rhea Score (FIG. 7E) from the mouse studies.
[0045] FIGS. 8A-8B are graphs showing change in animal
weight (g) and Cumulative Severity Score following treat-
ment of mice with either trofinetide (FIG. 8A) or vorinostat
(FIG. 8B).
[0046] FIG. 9A shows a graph showing that oral admin-
istration of vorinostat (COG002) in mice treated at 35 days
of age, after the onset of severe symptoms, is more effective
than trofinetide in reducing the Cumulative Severity Score.
[0047] FIGS. 9B-9G are graphs showing change in cumu-
lative mobility score (FIG. 9B), diarrhea score (FIG. 9C),
breathing score (FIG. 9D), acetylation of alpha-tubulin in
bronchioles (FIG. 9E), acetylation of alpha-tubulin in skel-
etal muscle (FIG. 9F), and ratio of acetylated alpha-tubulin
to bIII-tubulin (FIG. 9G) in mouse studies.
[0048] FIG. 10 provides an overview of the mouse neu-
robehavioral test results as fold change relative to wild type
animals.
[0049] FIGS. 11A-11B provide data showing that vorinos-
tat treatment restores naïve C57BL6 behavior in anxiety,
activity and novelty seeking, using the Elevated Plus Maze
test.
[0050] FIGS. 12A-12B are graphs showing results from
Open Field and Locomotor tests in mice treated with vor-
inostat or trofinetide.
[0051] FIGS. 13A-13B are graphs showing results from
Y-Maze Novelty tests in mice treated with vorinostat or
trofinetide.
[0052] FIG. 14 shows a heat map of plasma cytokine
levels in mice treated with vorinostat or trofinetide normal-
ized to wild type animals and shown as Z-score relative to
MeCP2 KO animals.

[PAGE 5] DETAILED DESCRIPTION

[0053] Aspects of the disclosure relate, in part, to methods
of ameliorating, reversing, or eliminating symptoms asso-
ciated with neurodevelopmental disorders such as Rett syn-
drome (RTT) and CDKL5 deficiency disorder (CDD), which
are X-linked developmental brain disorders, in a subject. In
some embodiments, methods of ameliorating, reversing, or
eliminating symptoms associated with RTT and/or CDD
involve administration of vorinostat, ivermectin, trofinetide,
a therapeutically effective amount of Bacteroides fragilis
and/or a polysaccharide isolated from Bacteroides fragilis to
a subject. Some aspects of the disclosure relate to methods
of treating neurodevelopmental disorders such as Rett syn-
drome (RTT) or CDKL5 deficiency disorder (CDD) in a
subject, for example, by administration of vorinostat, iver-
mectin, trofinetide, a therapeutically effective amount of
Bacteroides fragilis and/or a polysaccharide isolated from
Bacteroides fragilis to the subject.

[PAGE 5] Symptoms of Rett Syndrome

[0054] Rett syndrome is a rare genetic neurological and
developmental disorder that affects the way the brain devel-
ops, causing a progressive loss of motor skills and speech.
This disorder primarily affects girls. Most babies with Rett
syndrome seem to develop normally for the first 6 to 18
months of age, and then lose skills they previously had-
such as the ability to crawl, walk, communicate or use their
hands. Over time, children with Rett syndrome have increas-
ing problems with the use of muscles that control movement,
coordination and communication. Rett syndrome can also
cause seizures and intellectual disability. Abnormal hand
movements, such as repetitive rubbing or clapping, replace
purposeful hand use.
[0055] Babies with Rett syndrome typically are born after
a normal pregnancy and delivery. Most infants with Rett
syndrome seem to grow and behave normally for the first six
months. After that, signs and symptoms start to appear.
[0056] The most pronounced changes generally occur at
12 to 18 months of age, over a period of weeks or months.
Symptoms and their severity can vary greatly from child to
child.
[0057] Rett syndrome signs and symptoms include, but are
not limited to:
[0058] Slowed growth. Brain growth slows after birth.
Smaller than normal head size (microcephaly) is usually the
first sign that a child has Rett syndrome. As children get
older, delayed growth in other parts of the body becomes
evident.
[0059] Loss of normal movement and coordination. The
first signs often include reduced hand control and a decreas-
ing ability to crawl or walk normally. At first, this loss of
abilities occurs rapidly and then it continues more gradually.
Eventually muscles become weak or may become rigid or
spastic with abnormal movement and positioning.
[0060] Loss of communication abilities. Children with
Rett syndrome typically begin to lose the ability to speak, to
make eye contact and to communicate in other ways. They
may become disinterested in other people, toys and their
surroundings. Some children have rapid changes, such as a
sudden loss of speech. Over time, children may gradually
regain eye contact and develop nonverbal communication
skills.
[0061] Abnormal hand movements. Children with Rett
syndrome typically develop repetitive, purposeless hand
movements that may differ for each person. Hand move-
ments may include hand-wringing, squeezing, clapping,
tapping or rubbing.
[0062] Unusual eye movements. Children with Rett syn-
drome tend to have unusual eye movements, such as intense
staring, blinking, crossed eyes or closing one eye at a time.
[0063] Breathing problems. These include breath-holding,
abnormally rapid breathing (hyperventilation), forceful
exhalation of air or saliva, and swallowing air. These prob-
lems tend to occur during waking hours but breathing
disturbances such as shallow breathing or periodic breathing
can occur during sleep.
[0064] Irritability and crying. Children with Rett syn-
drome may become increasingly agitated and irritable as
they get older. Periods of crying or screaming may begin
suddenly, for no apparent reason, and last for hours. Some
children may experience fears and anxiety.
[0065] Anxiety. Anxiety may be assessed using traditional
measures and assessments of anxiety and mood behaviors
such as RSBQ; Anxiety, Depression, and Mood Scale (AD-
AMS); and Aberrant Behavior Checklist-Community (ABC-
C), which are assessments for people with neurodevelop-
mental disorders. Anxiety can be assessed using these
measures in terms of score profiles, relationship with age
and clinical severity, reliability, concurrent validity, and
functional implications.
[0066] Other abnormal behaviors. These may include, for
example, sudden, odd facial expressions and long bouts of
laughter, hand licking, and grasping of hair or clothing.
[0067] Cognitive disabilities. Loss of skills can be accom-
panied by a loss of intellectual functioning.
[0068] Seizures. Most people who have Rett syndrome
experience seizures at some time during their lives. Multiple
seizure types may occur and are accompanied by an abnor-
mal electroencephalogram (EEG).
[0069] Abnormal curvature of the spine (scoliosis). Sco-
liosis is common with Rett syndrome. It typically begins
between 8 and 11 years of age and increases with age.
Surgery may be required if the curvature is severe.
[0070] Irregular heartbeat. This is a life-threatening prob-
lem for many children and adults with Rett syndrome and
can result in sudden death.
[0071] Sleep disturbances. Abnormal sleep patterns can
include irregular sleep times, falling asleep during the day
and being awake at night, or waking in the night with crying
or screaming.
[0072] Other symptoms. A variety of other symptoms can
occur, such as thin, fragile bones prone to factures; small
hands and feet that are usually cold; problems with chewing
and swallowing; problems with bowel function; and teeth
grinding.

[PAGE 4] Symptoms of CDKL5 Deficiency Disorder
[0073] CDKL5 deficiency disorder is characterized by
seizures that begin in infancy, followed by significant delays
in many aspects of development.
[0074] Seizures in CDKL5 deficiency disorder usually
begin within the first 3 months of life and can appear as early
as the first week after birth. The types of seizures change
with age and may follow a predictable pattern. The most
common types are generalized tonic-clonic seizures, which
involve a loss of consciousness, muscle rigidity, and con-
vulsions; tonic seizures, which are characterized by abnor-
mal muscle contractions; and epileptic spasms, which
involve short episodes of muscle jerks. Seizures occur daily
in most people with CDKL5 deficiency disorder, although
they can have periods when they are seizure-free.
[0075] Development is impaired in children with CDKL5
deficiency disorder. Most have severe intellectual disability
and little or no speech. The development of gross motor
skills, such as sitting, standing, and walking, is delayed or
not achieved. About one-third of affected individuals are
able to walk independently. Fine motor skills, such as
picking up small objects with the fingers, are also impaired;
about half of affected individuals have purposeful use of
their hands. Most people with this condition have vision
problems (cortical visual impairment).
[0076] Other common features of CDKL5 deficiency dis-
order include repetitive hand movements (stereotypies),
such as clapping, hand licking, and hand sucking; teeth
grinding (bruxism); disrupted sleep; feeding difficulties; and
gastrointestinal problems including constipation and back-
flow of acidic stomach contents into the esophagus (gas-
troesophageal reflux). Some affected individuals have epi-
sodes of irregular breathing. Distinctive facial features in
some people with CDKL5 deficiency disorder include a high
and broad forehead, large and deep-set eyes, a well-defined
space between the nose and upper lip (philtrum), full lips,
widely spaced teeth, and a high roof of the mouth (palate).
Other physical differences can also occur, such as an unusu-
ally small head size (microcephaly), side-to-side curvature
of the spine (scoliosis), and tapered fingers.
[0077] CDKL5 deficiency disorder was previously classi-
fied as an atypical form of Rett syndrome. These conditions
have common features, including seizures, intellectual dis-
ability, and other problems with development. However, the
signs and symptoms associated with CDKL5 deficiency
disorder and its genetic cause are distinct from those of Rett
syndrome, and CDKL5 deficiency disorder is now consid-
ered a separate condition.
[0078] People having CDKL5 deficiency can experience
anxiety and mood disturbances. Anxiety may be assessed
using traditional measures and assessments of anxiety and
mood behaviors such as RSBQ; Anxiety, Depression, and
Mood Scale (ADAMS); and Aberrant Behavior Checklist-
Community (ABC-C), which are assessments for people
with neurodevelopmental disorders. Anxiety can be assessed
using these measures in terms of score profiles, relationship
with age and clinical severity, reliability, concurrent validity,
and functional implications.

[PAGE 4] Therapeutic Agents

[PAGE 4] Vorinostat
[0079] Vorinostat (N'-hydroxy-N-phenyloctanediamide) is
a synthetic hydroxamic acid derivative with antineoplastic
activity given, for example, in intravenous and oral formu-
lations. Vorinostat, a second generation polar-planar com-
pound, binds to the catalytic domain of the histone deacety-
lases (HDACs). This allows the hydroxamic moiety to
chelate zinc ion located in the catalytic pockets of HDAC,
thereby inhibiting deacetylation and leading to an accumu-
lation of both hyperacetylated histones and transcription
factors. Hyperacetylation of histone proteins results in the
upregulation of the cyclin-dependent kinase p21, followed
by G1 arrest. Hyperacetylation of non-histone proteins such
as tumor suppressor p53, alpha tubulin, and heat-shock
protein 90 produces additional anti-proliferative effects.
This agent also induces apoptosis and sensitizes tumor cells
to cell death processes. Vorinostat crosses the blood-brain
barrier. Vorinostat is approved for use in refractory or
relapsed cutaneous T cell lymphoma. Vorinostat is associ-
ated with modest rate of minor serum enzyme elevations
during therapy but has not been linked to cases of clinically
apparent liver injury. Vorinostat is marketed under the name
ZOLINZA® for the treatment of cutaneous T cell lymphoma
(CTCL). The chemical structure of vorinostat is below:


[PAGE 5] Ivermectin
[0080] Ivermectin is an orally bioavailable macrocyclic
lactone derived from Streptomyces avermitilis, with anti-
parasitic and potential anti-viral activities. Upon adminis-
tration, ivermectin exerts its anthelmintic effect through
binding and activating glutamate-gated chloride channels
(GluCls) expressed on nematode neurons and pharyngeal
muscle cells. This causes increased permeability of chloride
ions, causing a state of hyperpolarization and results in the
paralysis and death of the parasite. Ivermectin is typically
given as one or two oral doses. Ivermectin therapy has been
associated with minor, self-limiting serum aminotransferase
elevations and very rare instances of clinically apparent liver
injury. The chemical structure of ivermectin is below:


[PAGE 5] Trofinetide
[0081] Trofinetide (NNZ-2566; (2S)-2-[[(2S)-1-(2-amino-
acetyl)-2-methylpyrrolidine-2-carbonyl]amino]pen-
tanedioic acid), a neuroprotective analogue of [glypromate],
is a molecule that has a profile suitable for both intravenous
infusion and chronic oral delivery. It is currently in devel-
opment to treat traumatic brain injury. Trofinetide is a
modified version of glypromate (GPE), a product of insulin-
like growth factor 1 (IGF-1) breakdown in the brain. Both
proteins are important for normal functioning of the devel-
oping brain, and for responding to disease, stress, and injury
in the mature brain. Trofinetide was designed to mimic
GPE's biological functions while having better pharmaco-
logical properties: easier storage, oral administration, and
longer periods in the bloodstream. Some studies have
reported the presence of abnormally low brain levels of
IGF-1 in several conditions, including Rett syndrome, frag-
ile X syndrome, and brain injury. Restoring the levels of
IGF-1 and GPE may help prevent further brain damage in
people with these disorders. The chemical structure of
trofinetide is below:


[PAGE 5] Bacteroides fragilis
[0082] The B. fragilis group is the most commonly iso-
lated Bacteroidaceae in anaerobic infections, especially
those that originate from the gastrointestinal microbiota. B.
fragilis is the most prevalent organism in the B. fragilis
group, accounting for 41% to 78% of the isolates of the
group. These organisms are resistant to penicillin by virtue
of production of beta-lactamase, and by other unknown
factors. This group was formerly classified as subspecies of
B. fragilis (i.e., B. f. ssp. fragilis, B. f. ssp. distasonis, B. f.
ssp. ovatus, B. f. ssp. thetaiotaomicron, and B. f. ssp.
vulgatus). They have been reclassified into distinct species
on the basis of DNA homology studies. B. fragilis (formerly
known as B. f. ssp. fragilis) is often recovered from blood,
pleural fluid, peritoneal fluid, wounds, and brain abscesses.
Although the B. fragilis group is the most common species
found in clinical specimens, it is the least common Bacte-
roides present in fecal microbiota, comprising only 0.5% of
the bacteria present in stool. Their pathogenicity partly
results from their ability to produce capsular polysaccharide,
which is protective against phagocytosis and stimulates
abscess formation. The capsule complex of B. fragilis is
made up exclusively of Polysaccharide A (PSA) and poly-
saccharide B (PSB). PSA is a model symbiosis factor,
capable of activating T cell-dependent immune responses
that can affect both the development and homeostasis of the
host immune system.

[PAGE 5] Other Therapeutic Agents
[0083] The present disclosure contemplates the use of
various other agents for the treatment of neurodevelopmen-
tal disorders, such as Rett syndrome and/or CDKL5 defi-
ciency disorder, including any one or more agent selected
from tyrphostin-AG-1478, sirolimus, vorinostat, panobinos-
tat, entinostat, trichostatin-a, palbociclib, nefazodone, pyra-
zolanthrone, tamoxifen, wortmannin, azacitidine, indole-3-
carbinol, thapsigargin, diphenyleneiodonium, parthenolide,
artesunate, chlorpromazine, pifithrin, ivermectin, cyclohex-
imide, fluoxetine, clozapine, ethambutol, selamectin, tri-
closan, tunicamycin, mifepristone, genistein, and cinobuf-
agin.
[0084] In some embodiments, the agent is an agent of
Table 1. In some embodiments, the agent is tyrphostin-AG-
1478. In some embodiments, the agent is sirolimus. In some
embodiments, the agent is vorinostat. In some embodiments,
the agent is panobinostat. In some embodiments, the agent
is entinostat. In some embodiments, the agent is trichostatin-
a. In some embodiments, the agent is palbociclib. In some
embodiments, the agent is nefazodone. In some embodi-
ments, the agent is pyrazolanthrone. In some embodiments,
the agent is tamoxifen. In some embodiments, the agent is
wortmannin. In some embodiments, the agent is azacitidine.
[PAGE 6] In some embodiments, the agent is indole-3-carbinol. In
some embodiments, the agent is thapsigargin. In some
embodiments, the agent is diphenylenciodonium. In some
embodiments, the agent is parthenolide. In some embodi-
ments, the agent is artesunate. In some embodiments, the
agent is chlorpromazine. In some embodiments, the agent is
pifithrin. In some embodiments, the agent is ivermectin. In
some embodiments, the agent is cycloheximide. In some
embodiments, the agent is fluoxetine. In some embodiments,
the agent is clozapine. In some embodiments, the agent is
ethambutol. In some embodiments, the agent is selamectin.
In some embodiments, the agent is triclosan. In some
embodiments, the agent is tunicamycin. In some embodi-
ments, the agent is mifepristone. In some embodiments, the
agent is genistein. In some embodiments, the agent is
cinobufagin.


[PAGE 6] Pharmaceutical Compositions
[0085] In some aspects, the present disclosure provides
compositions comprising any of the agents as disclosed
herein. In some embodiments, the compositions further
comprise a pharmaceutically-acceptable excipient (e.