Downloaded from https://www.pnas.org by 68.114.221.214 on August 2, 2025 from IP address 68.114.221.214.

Early, nonciliary role for microtubule proteins in
left-right patterning is conserved across kingdoms

Many types of embryos' bodyplans exhibit consistently oriented
laterality of the heart, viscera, and brain. Errors of left-right pat-
terning present an important class of human birth defects, and
considerable controversy exists about the nature and evolutionary
conservation of the molecular mechanisms that allow embryos to
reliably orient the left-right axis. Here we show that the same
mutations in the cytoskeletal protein tubulin that alter asymmetry
in plants also affect very early steps of left-right patterning in
nematode and frog embryos, as well as chirality of human cells
in culture. In the frog embryo, tubulin & and tubulin y-associated
proteins are required for the differential distribution of maternal
proteins to the left or right blastomere at the first cell division. Our
data reveal a remarkable molecular conservation of mechanisms
initiating left-right asymmetry. The origin of laterality is cytoplas-
mic, ancient, and highly conserved across kingdoms, a fundamental
feature of the cytoskeleton that underlies chirality in cells and
multicellular organisms.


Consistent laterality is a fascinating aspect of embryonic de-
■velopment and has considerable implications for the physi-
ology and behavior of the organism. Although vertebrates are
generally bilaterally symmetric externally, most internal organs,
such as the heart, viscera, and brain display asymmetric structure
and/or unilateral positioning with respect to the left-right (LR)
axis. A common defect in LR patterning is the loss of concor-
dance among the sidedness of individual organs known as heter-
otaxia. In human beings, abnormalities in the proper development
of laterality occur in more than 1 in 8,000 live births and often
have significant medical consequences (1). Organ asymmetry is
highly conserved among species; however, considerable contro-
versy exists about the early steps of LR patterning among phyla
(2-4) and the physical mechanisms that can break symmetry (5).

One model predicts that cilia-driven extracellular fluid flow
during gastrulation is the origin of LR asymmetry (6). Because
numerous species initiate asymmetry before (or without) the
presence of cilia (7, 8), this model implies that asymmetry gen-
eration must be poorly conserved, with numerous distinct
mechanisms used throughout phyla. However, “ciliary” proteins,
such as left-right dynein, known to be important for LR patterning,
also have intracellular roles compatible with cilia-independent
functions in laterality (9-12). In contrast to the nodal flow
model, we have suggested that asymmetry is instead an ancient,
well-conserved property of individual cells arising from the chi-
rality of cytoskeletal structures that is subsequently amplified by
physiological mechanisms (4, 12, 13). Thus, we sought the most
evolutionarily distant model systems, and ones that are known
not to rely on cilia for LR patterning, to test the hypothesis of
fundamental molecular conservation of asymmetry mechanisms.

Recent findings in Arabidopsis thaliana have shown that
mutations in a-tubulin and in a y-tubulin-associated protein
(Tubgcp2) play an important role in the symmetry properties of
the plant's axial organs (14-16). Wild-type A. thaliana axial
organs do not twist during normal elongation, and its flowers are
radially symmetrical. This symmetry can be broken by mutations
in tubulin and tubulin-associated protein complexes. The tubulin
mutations spiral1, spiral2, and spiral 3 produce right-handed he-
lical growth mutants. Lefty (lefty1 and lefty2) mutants were found
to be suppressor mutants of spirall, and when outcrossed dis-
played a prominent left-handed helical growth (14, 16). Both
a-tubulin and y-tubulin complexes are ubiquitous in eukaryotes
and are involved in the formation and nucleation of micro-
tubules. Here, we characterize the laterality phenotypes induced
by the same mutations in a vertebrate (the frog Xenopus laevis),
the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans, and mammalian cells, sup-
porting a fundamental role for tubulin in the cilia-independent
generation of LR asymmetry.

[PAGE 1] Results

To determine if the same tubulin proteins implicated in Arabi-
dopsis asymmetry also control large-scale asymmetry of both
vertebrate and plant systems, homologous mutations were made
in X. laevis a tubulin and y tubulin-associated protein Tubgcp2
(Fig. S1). These mutations function as dominant negatives when
assembled into the cytoskeleton together with native subunits
(14, 17). Synthetic mRNAs encoding mutant tubulins were in-
jected into Xenopus embryo blastomeres (at various early stages)
using standard methods (18). At stage 45, embryos were analyzed
for position (situs) of the heart, stomach, and gallbladder (Fig. 1
A-C), the definitive readout of LR patterning. All treatments
were titered to avoid nonspecific defects (resulting in embryos
with perfectly normal dorsoanterior development, clear left- or
right-sided organs with normal morphology, correct size and
relative proportions, and wild-type behavior), ruling out general
toxicity as a cause of LR phenotypes.

Embryos injected immediately after fertilization with mRNA
encoding the dominant negative mutant a-tubulin (tub4a) dis-
played significant levels of heterotaxia (independently random-
ized sidedness of the three scored organs, Figs. 1D and E),
revealing a common genetic underpinning of regulation of asym-
metry between plant and vertebrate systems. Injections of wild-
type tub4a mRNA had no effect. Co-injections of both mutants'
mRNAs together did not significantly increase the incidence of
heterotaxia, suggesting that these impact the same pathway (are
not additive). We next introduced the mutant mRNAs at
different time points during development, to determine when the
tubulins functioned in LR patterning and test the possibility that
the relevant tubulin structures are in the cilia at the gastrocoel
roof plate (GRP).

Synthetic mRNAs injected immediately after fertilization are
already translated by the two-cell stage (Fig. S2 and ref. 19);
studies of GRP cilia routinely inject at the four-cell stage to
target reagents to this structure (20). If tubulins were to function
in LR asymmetry at any time after the first few cleavages (e.g., in
the GRP during neurulation), injections at the two- or four-cell
stages would show the same randomizing effects on asymmetry
as do injections at one-cell stage. In contrast, injections of mu-
tant tub4a mRNA into both blastomeres of the two-cell embryo
(or later) had no effect on asymmetry. The mutant tubulin's
introduction into very early embryos randomizes LR patterning
when present during the earliest events of cleavage-stage de-
velopment, but cannot affect the LR axis when introduced as
early as the two-cell stage, ruling out involvement in LR pat-
terning steps occurring after the first cleavages.

The Xenopus fate map facilitates targeting to the right or left
halves of the embryo (Fig. S3), allowing us to test spatial
requirements for tubulin mutant-induced randomization with
respect to the ciliated organ. Targeted injections were made in
four-cell stage embryos, in the left-dorsal (LD) blastomere, which
is known to be an early precursor of the GRP and the only side
required for nodal flow (20), or the right-ventral (RV) cell, whose
descendants do not contribute to the GRP (21). Neither injection
made at the four-cell stage produced significant levels of heter-
otaxia (Fig. 1D), a result incompatible with mutant a-tubulin
affecting asymmetry via impact upon cilia-related events at the
node. The same results were obtained using injections of mRNA
encoding mutated y-tubulin associated protein (tubgcp2) mRNA
(Fig. 1 F and G). For both constructs, a single injection or two
injections 180° apart at the one-cell stage randomized laterality,
but injections of both or a single blastomere at the two-cell stage
or later did not, ruling out the possibility that effects at the one-
cell stage are due to an imbalance of injected mRNA on one side
but not the other. These data reveal that the same functions of
tubulin that alter asymmetry in a plant species are also involved
in LR patterning in frog embryos, and that this function takes
place at or just before the first cleavage.

To determine whether the tubulin-regulated events function
in the same pathway as known early LR mechanisms and control
downstream asymmetric transcription, we asked whether the
expression of tubulin mutants perturbed the normally left-sided
expression of the earliest known asymmetric gene in Xenopus:
the TGF-ẞ signaling factor Nodal (Xnr-1) (22). Xnr-1 is normally
expressed only on the left side of the embryo at approximately
stage 22 (23). Embryos injected with mutated tubulin mRNAs at
the one-cell stage were fixed at stage 22 and processed for in situ
hybridization with an Xnr-1 probe. A significant percentage
(64.7% for tub4a and 32.5% for tubgcp2) of mutant-injected
embryos displayed incorrect Xnr-1 expression (Fig. 2), showing
that these tubulin mutations affect LR asymmetry upstream of
Nodal expression.

One model is that mutant tubulins perturb the normal right-
ward bias in the intracellular transport provided by the cyto-
skeleton in cleavage-stage frog embryos (19, 24). These oriented
cytoskeletal tracks allow cytoplasmic motors, such as kinesins
and dyneins, to localize specific protein cargo to the left or right
sides. We previously showed that the cytoskeleton during the
one-cell stage confers rightward bias to kinesin heavy chain
(KHC) motors and their cargo (25-27). We asked whether this
aspect of the normal Xenopus cytoskeleton might be perturbed
following the misexpression of our mutant proteins. Embryos
were injected at the one-cell stage with mRNA encoding KHC
fused to a ẞ-gal reporter protein, and sectioned at the four-cell
stage to quantify the distribution of ẞ-gal (blue) signal on the
left vs. right sides; this assay (28) provides a readout of the cy-
toskeletal orientation via localization of the microtubule-de-
pendent motor protein KHC (Fig. 3A). Embryos receiving ẞ-gal
alone (which cannot localize by intracellular transport) most
often exhibited bilateral signal. As previously described, ẞ-gal:
KHC fusions were preferentially localized on the right; crucially,
the localization of ẞ-gal:KHC signal in embryos also injected
with the tubgcp2 mutant became disrupted, and exhibited
approximately equal number of right, left, and bilateral local-
izations for the KHC motor and its cargo (Fig. 3 B and C). The
difference in localization of microtubule-dependent motor pro-
tein cargo between these three conditions was statistically sig-
nificant (P < 0.01, x²), confirming that the introduction of the
tubgcp2 mutant alters a known aspect of early microtubule
function. Interestingly, ẞ-gal signal was almost never detected in
embryos when the tuba4 mutant was coinjected with the ẞ-gal:
KHC (109 out of 110 embryos); although this remains to be in-
vestigated in future studies, it is conceivable that some new aspect
of cytoskeletal organization can also trigger protein degradation
machinery for molecular motors' cargo.

[PAGE 3] Having shown an alteration in cytoskeletal organization and
a mislocalization of previously described asymmetric transport,
we next sought a comprehensive (unbiased) analysis of asym-
metric maternal components in the early embryo, and wanted to
determine which of these were dependent on tubulin (thus
identifying also those asymmetric Xenopus proteins for which no
immunohistochemistry-suitable antibody is available). We per-
formed a quantitative proteomics profiling of the left and right
sides of four-cell embryos. Control embryos, and those injected
at the one-cell stage with either the tub4a or tubgcp2 mutant,
were fixed in methanol at the four-cell stage, oriented, and split
along the LR axis (first cleavage plane) with a blade. The left and
right sides were pooled (n = 50), and samples were analyzed via
liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry. Proteins showing
a significant (P < 0.05, ANOVA) (more than 3× difference in
either direction) left- or right-sided bias in control embryos were
selected. The analysis confirmed asymmetric localization of ion
transporters (Tables S3 and S4) and the higher frequency of
right-biased targets, which has been noted in previous work
(19, 26, 27). The presence of mutated tubulin significantly affected
the endogenous bias in localization of some proteins, either re-
versing or completely abolishing it (Tables S3 and S4). As expec-
ted, this included cytoskeletal and transport-related proteins such
as dynactin, cofilin-1, and a nonmuscle myosin (Table S1).

Cofilin-1, an actin depolymerization and filament severing
protein (29), was chosen for further investigation because of the
known importance of actin in early cytoskeletal organization,
Cofilin's role in directing the intracellular trafficking of ion
transporter cargo (30), and recent data showing cofilin is
asymmetrically transcribed in the two-cell mouse embryo (31).
Fertilized eggs injected with either tdTomato:Cofilin-1a alone,
or in conjunction with a tubulin mutant, were allowed to develop
and analyzed for tdTomato localization (Fig. 4) at stage 45,
where the embryo's transparency allowed clear detection of
which side's progenitor cells had inherited the tagged cofilin.
Whereas injections of tdTomato alone showed no significant bias
in localization, tdTomato:Cofilin-1a injections revealed a signifi-
cant (P << 0.01, paired t test) leftward bias in the fluorescent
signal (Left localized: Right localized ratio, L:R, of 1.35), con-
firming that cofilin protein is indeed localized asymmetrically
during the first cleavages. Coinjections of either tubulin mutant
together with the tdTomato:cofilin-1a significantly (P < 0.05)
altered the normal left-ward bias of cofilin localization, and lead
to subsequent randomization of organ situs (Fig. S4 and Table
S5). Coinjection with the tuba4 mutant resulted in a 0.91 L:R
bias, thus abolishing cofilin's leftward bias, whereas the tubgcp2
mutant resulted in a 0.69 L:R ratio, reversing the bias (Fig. 4 C
and D). Scoring organ situs in tdTomato:cofilin-injected embryos
revealed a weak but significant (8%) incidence of heterotaxia,
consistent with some impairment of the interaction of cofilin
with the LR localization machinery due to the addition of a large
tdTomato structure (thus likely artificially lowering the bias in
localization we observed). Thus, tubulin mutations are perturbing
the normal consistent LR bias of a range of maternal proteins at
the four-cell stage, consistent with models in which cytoskeletal
organization drives positioning of LR-relevant cargo during the
first cleavages.

[PAGE 4] Having observed the remarkable conservation of asymmetry
roles for tubulin proteins between frog and Arabidopsis, we
tested the same mutations in two additional model systems: the
nematode C. elegans, and human HL-60 cells, thereby covering
an extremely broad range of asymmetry types and bodyplans.

The two "AWC" olfactory neurons of C. elegans are mor-
phologically symmetric, but display asymmetric expression of
chemosensory receptors along the LR axis. Wild-type animals
generate one AWCON cell, which expresses the reporter gene
str-2p::GFP, and one AWCOFF cell, which does not (Fig. 5 A-C)
(32). Specific disruption of microtubules in AWC by nocodazole
and benomyl generates two AWCON neurons, suggesting that
microtubules are required for LR AWC neuronal asymmetry
(33). C. elegans TBA-9 a-tubulin shares 75% identical amino
acids with A. thaliana TUA6 a-tubulin. We mutated the con-
served aspartic acid (256th) and glutamic acid (259th) residues in
TBA-9 to alanine and expressed the TBA-9D256A/E259A mutant
protein in AWC under the control of the odr-3 promoter. Like
nocodazole treatment, expression of TBA-9D256A/E259A caused
a two-AWCON phenotype at a frequency significantly higher than
that caused by expression of wild-type TBA-9 when injected at
the same concentration (Fig. 5C). Both odr-3p::tba-9 and odr-3p::
tba-9D256A/E259A_transgenes also caused a weak two-AWCOFF
phenotype. Thus, two conserved residues in the GTPase-activating
domain of a-tubulins regulate microtubule dynamics required for
precise LR patterning of C. elegans.

An important recent finding is the observation that mammalian
cells in culture, having neither node-like structure nor cilia-derived
fluid flow, establish and maintain consistent LR asymmetries
with respect to axes defined by internal polarity markers (34, 35).
Neutrophil-like HL-60 cells in culture extend pseudopodia to the
left of an axis drawn between the nucleus and centrosome (35).

[PAGE 5] To test whether this asymmetry likewise depended on func-
tional tubulin proteins, we transfected differentiated HL-60
cells with GFP-Arrestin-3 (a marker of the microtubule or-
ganizing center) and one of the tubulin constructs: wild-type
tub-a6 (Fig. 5D), or mutant tub-a6 (Fig. 5E). Whereas wild-
type tub-a6 (at expression levels achievable by transfection)
did not affect the leftward bias, mutant tub-a6 abolished it.
Thus, the same tubulin mutations that specifically randomize
asymmetry in plant, vertebrate, and nematode systems likewise
do so in mammalian cells.


[PAGE 5] Discussion

The ciliary flow paradigm is forced to postulate highly divergent
origins of asymmetry, because numerous invertebrate phyla es-
tablish consistent LR asymmetry without cilia or a node. More-
over, neither the pig nor the chick use cilia in their LR patterning
pathway (8, 36); zebrafish (37-39) and mouse (40) mutants ex-
hibit normal asymmetry despite ciliary defects, and even mouse
embryos already have LR-nonequivalent blastomeres by the third
cleavage (41). We tested a model of much earlier asymmetry-
determining processes that would exhibit a more satisfying evo-
lutionary conservation across a wide range of phyla.

Our data show that the presence of well characterized mutant
forms of either a- or y- tubulin subunits in frog embryos specif-
ically randomizes the LR axis (Fig. 1), controlling the LR
pathway upstream of the well conserved asymmetric expression
of Nodal (Fig. 2). Although the levels of heterotaxia were clearly
significantly different from controls, they were below the ~87%
theoretical maximum (for three fully randomized organs) be-
cause of the need to titer mutant tubulin mRNA to low levels to
avoid possibility of confounding pure asymmetry phenotypes
with general toxicity. Despite the crucial housekeeping roles of
tubulin, we were able to find a level of expression of mutants that
allowed dissection of their LR patterning roles independent of
any toxicity or generalized teratology.

Downloaded from https://www.pnas.org by 68.114.221.214 on August 2, 2025 from IP address 68.114.221.214.


[PAGE 5] Discussion
The ciliary flow paradigm is forced to postulate highly divergent
origins of asymmetry, because numerous invertebrate phyla es-
tablish consistent LR asymmetry without cilia or a node. More-
over, neither the pig nor the chick use cilia in their LR patterning
pathway (8, 36); zebrafish (37-39) and mouse (40) mutants ex-
hibit normal asymmetry despite ciliary defects, and even mouse
embryos already have LR-nonequivalent blastomeres by the third
cleavage (41). We tested a model of much earlier asymmetry-
determining processes that would exhibit a more satisfying evo-
lutionary conservation across a wide range of phyla.

Our data show that the presence of well characterized mutant
forms of either a- or y- tubulin subunits in frog embryos specif-
ically randomizes the LR axis (Fig. 1), controlling the LR
pathway upstream of the well conserved asymmetric expression
of Nodal (Fig. 2). Although the levels of heterotaxia were clearly
significantly different from controls, they were below the ~87%
theoretical maximum (for three fully randomized organs) be-
cause of the need to titer mutant tubulin mRNA to low levels to
avoid possibility of confounding pure asymmetry phenotypes
with general toxicity. Despite the crucial housekeeping roles of
tubulin, we were able to find a level of expression of mutants that
allowed dissection of their LR patterning roles independent of
any toxicity or generalized teratology.

Varying the time of injection allowed us to place strict bounds
on the timing of the activity of these proteins in the LR pathway.
Strikingly, whereas one-cell injections (whether made on one or
both sides of the prospective midline) randomized asymmetry,
injections at the two- or four-cell stage were already too late to
do so (Fig. 1 D and F), suggesting that the function of tubulin in
asymmetry occur no later than approximately the four- or eight-
cell stage (because two-cell injections produce protein by then).
Most crucially, injections of both cells at the two-cell stage do not
affect asymmetry, ruling out interference with cilia-driven events
at the GRP as the mechanism by which these mutants randomize
the LR axis. Because the GRP is strongly affected by reagents
injected at four-cell stage (20), our results show that expressing
mutant tubulin in GRP cells makes no difference to asymmetry;
the key factor that determines whether or not the LR axis will be
randomized is whether tubulin mutant mRNA was injected be-
fore the two-cell stage and thus was available for translation
during the earliest stages of development. The need to function
during the first few cleavages (Fig. 1) is incompatible with
explanations involving cilia or nodal flow. Instead, the data are
consistent with models in which the early cytoskeleton is nucle-
ated by a chiral structure (42) that orients itself with respect to
the other two axes, and thus biases the intracellular transport of
key determinants along the LR axis (12, 43). One such model is
shown in Fig. S5.

As in snail embryos (44), early cytoskeletal dynamics are
transduced into changes of asymmetric gene expression in ver-
tebrate embryos. We previously showed that orientation of the
cytoskeleton at the first few cleavages is crucial for the correct
asymmetric localization of several maternal proteins whose ac-
tivity is in turn transduced into asymmetric transcription (19, 27,
45); by the second cell cleavage, the cytoskeleton already exhibits
a directionality that results in accumulation of kinesin-associated
cargo (or marker molecules) to the right side (19). Others showed
that a preexisting consistent chirality of the cytoskeleton exists in
the egg cortex (46). Despite the reduced levels of mRNA needed
for double injections (ẞ-gal:KHC + tubgcp2 mutant), in-
troduction of the mutant tubulin significantly affected the ability
of the native cytoskeleton to direct normal localization of motor
protein cargo (Fig. 3). We hypothesize that the presence of these
mutant tubulin proteins alter subtle aspects of the intracellular
cytoskeleton that are required to properly localize laterality-rel-
evant cargo molecules across the LR axis.

To get the first unbiased glimpse of such asymmetries existing
very soon after establishment of the midline, we performed a
proteomic analysis comparing the left and right blastomeres'
contents. This analysis revealed proteins with significant LR bias
at the four-cell stage (Tables S3 and S4). Although the functions
of these asymmetrically localized proteins remain to be probed
by future studies, these data confirm the existence of consistent
molecular asymmetries at very early stages (long before gas-
trulation) (25, 27, 46, 47) and exhibit a relative enrichment of
right-sided proteins as found in our previous screens.

Although the large yolky cells of the early frog embryos are
not conducive to the high-resolution imaging of cytoskeletal
structure needed to identify subtle changes in chirality, the pro-
teomic data reveal the consequences of tubulin mutation for the
asymmetric distribution of early embryonic components, despite
the unavailability of antibodies. Analysis of protein distribution
after microinjection of the two mutant cytoskeletal protein
mRNAs showed (Table S1) that a number of important signaling
proteins become mislocalized. Thus, we propose that the role of
tubulins during early development is to serve as components
of the chiral cytoskeleton by means of which asymmetric com-
ponents sort to the left and right sides during the first cleavages,
and as an important component of other intracellular localization
events taking place at the two- to eight-cell stages. We selected
cofilin, and labeled it with a fused fluorescent protein. Although
this had somewhat of a destabilizing effect on asymmetry (Fig. S4,
suggesting a possible functional role for cofilin), we were able
to observe a statistically significant bias in its native localization
(Fig. 4 C and D) and showed that this native LR bias is abolished
when tubulin mutants are introduced in the one-cell embryo.

Our data support previous models in which cytoskeletal chi-
rality is amplified via differences in intracellular transport of key
cargo during very early stages (24, 43, 48, 49). Although the
details are somewhat different, that same scheme is used by snail
(44) and C. elegans (33) embryos, and the same initial asymmetry
is also compatible with a number of subsequent amplification
mechanisms including asymmetric chromatid segregation (9)
and planar cell polarity (4). Perhaps the most remarkable aspect
of these data is the widespread evolutionary conservation (even
across the independent origin of multicellularity in plants and
animals) of the role of these tubulin proteins in asymmetry,
extending to plant coiling (15), C. elegans asymmetric neural
patterning (Fig. 5 A-C), pseudopodial asymmetries in human cells
in culture (Fig. 5 D and E), and organ placement of the vertebrate
X. laevis (Fig. 1). These findings are consistent with the nonciliary
roles for tubulin in frog asymmetry, as neither nematodes nor
plants nor HL-60 cells use cilia in their asymmetry pathways. We
have previously stressed the evolutionary conservation of several
asymmetry-amplifying mechanisms across multiple diverse taxa
(7, 12, 13, 50). The above results implicate a single protein as an
ancient, fundamental element with a highly conserved role as the
initiator of chirality, upon which very different bodyplans can es-
tablish consistent downstream asymmetries of form and function.

[PAGE 6] Materials and Methods
For frogs, plasmids containing X. laevis tuba4 and Tubgcp2 (Xgrip110) and
cofilin cDNA were purchased from Open Biosystems (clone IDs: 7010865,
5078639, and 5571290, respectively). The coding regions of these cDNAs
were amplified by PCR and inserted into pCS2+ expression vectors using the
In-Fusion Advantage PCR Cloning kit (Clontech). Tuba4 pCS2 and TubGCP2
PCS2 plasmids were linearized with Acc651 for SP6 transcription. Tuba4-mut
(Ala180 replaced with Phe) and tubgcp2-mut (Gly453 replaced with Arg)
were generated using the QuikChange II Site-directed Mutagenesis kit
(Stratagene).

For nematodes, full-length tba-9 cDNA (1368 bp) was obtained with RT-
PCR of total mRNA from mixed stage worms and was subcloned to make
odr-3p::tba-9::SL2::TagRFP. odr-3p::tba-9D256A/E259A::SL2::TagRFP was gener-
ated by site-directed mutagenesis (Stratagene QuikChange kit). odr-3p::tba-
9::SL2::TagRFP (50 ng/µL) and odr-3p::tba-9D256A/E259A..SL2::TagRFP (50 ng/µL)
were injected as described (51). The coinjection marker ofm-1p::DsRed was
injected at 30 ng/µL. Please see SI Materials and Methods for additional
methods details. All experiments were conducted according to approved
protocols (Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee, No. M2008-08).