An ability to respond begins with inner alignment: How phase synchronisation effects
transitions to higher levels of agency
Tazzio Tissot¹, Mike Levin2,3, Chris Buckley⁴ and Richard Watson¹*.
1Computer Science, University of Southampton, Southampton, United Kingdom
2Allen Discovery Center, Tufts University, Medford, MA, United States
3Wyss Institute for Biologically Inspired Engineering, Harvard University, Boston, MA, United States
4School of Engineering and Informatics, University of Sussex, Brighton, United Kingdom
5Institute for Life Sciences, University of Southampton, Southampton, United Kingdom
*R.A.Watson@soton.ac.uk
Running head: Transitions in Agency

Abstract
How do multiple active components at one level of organisation create agential wholes at higher levels of organisation? For example, in organismic development, how does the multi-scale autonomy of the organism arise from the interactions of the molecules, cells and tissues that an organism contains? And, in the major evolutionary transitions, how does a multicellular organism, for example, arise as an evolutionary unit from the selective interests of its unicellular ancestors? We utilise computational models as a way to think about this general question. We take a deliberately minimalistic notion of an agent: a competency to take one of two possible actions to minimise stress. Helping ourselves to this behaviour at the microscale, we focus on conditions where this same type of agency appears spontaneously at a higher level of organisation. We find that a simple process of positive feedback on the timing of individual responses, loosely analogous to the natural phase synchronisation of weakly coupled oscillators, causes such a transition in behaviour. The emergent collectives that arise become, quite suddenly, able to respond to their external stresses in the same (minimal) sense as the original microscale units. This effects a dramatic rescaling of the system behaviour, and a quantifiable increase in problem-solving competency, serving as a model of how higher-level agency emerges from a pool of lower-level agents or active matter. We discuss how this dynamical 'waking-up' of higher-level collectives, through the alignment of their internal dynamics, might relate to reproductive/cell-cycle synchronisation in evolutionary transitions and development.
keywords: associative learning, evolutionary transitions in individuality, adaptive networks, multi-scale autonomy

[PAGE 1] Introduction
How do many become one (1-5)? At many different levels of organisation from molecular biology to human society, multiple individuals can sometimes change from acting separately, with individual goals and competencies, to working together in a way that produces a new entity, behaving as a single agent at a higher level of organisation, with new goals and new competencies (1, 2, 6-8). Each of us, for example, is a collection of cells (each retaining a repertoire of semi-autonomous behaviours and functions), that work together to create and maintain a coherent whole capable of collective action and goal-directed behaviour (2). In the developmental emergence of an individual from the active matter of which it is composed, the salient level of agency repeatedly transitions from one level of organisation to another, pivoting through different dynamic and behavioural spaces, including gene-expression, metabolic activity, cellular spatial coordination, electrical excitation (of neural and aneural cells), to large-scale behavioural alignment and coordinated action at the organismic level (1). At a quite different timescale, the process of evolution by natural selection has also scaled-up through multiple levels of organisation; rescaling the ability to exhibit heritable variation in reproductive success from parts to wholes recursively (9-11). These include transitions from multiple self-replicating molecules to the first chromosomes, the first protocells with multiple chromosomes, eukaryote cells with multiple previously free-living organelles, to multicellular organisms, to eusocial colonies (12-15).

[PAGE 2] These transitions in organismal and evolutionary agency are intimately related. Creation of a higher-level evolutionary unit might partly explain why components work together so well in organismic development and behaviour. On the other hand, the causal relationship may well be the other way around; i.e. it is the change in the level of organismal agency, when directed at the competency of survival and reproduction, which originates the new level of evolutionary unit on which selection can act (10). Understanding how new levels of agency arise (including new levels of organismic competency in developmental time and transitions in the evolutionary unit over evolutionary time) is an open problem (1, 2, 9, 16-18).
Agency shares some conceptual problems with non-reductionist accounts more generally. Although any behaviour of an agent can be traced to the behaviours of its component parts, it is also quite obvious that the same parts may behave differently when differently organised. Whilst the apparent generality and completeness of lower-level explanations can be attractive, ignoring the circumstances by which higher-level organisations constrain the 'options' or offer new 'affordances' to the component parts tends to make-invisible the biology that is interesting (1, 7, 9, 18, 19).
We wish to understand, in a simple mechanistic way, how multiple individuals can co-create the necessary organisational conditions to cause them to work together; in particular, when doing so appears to oppose the self-interest of component members. This transitional way of thinking about agency turns focus away from trying to define a categorical notion of agency, to draw a line in the sand, sufficient to distinguish between non-agential and agential systems (18). Instead, it focusses on how a given competency at one level of organisation transitions into a (perhaps similar) competency at another higher level of organisation (9, 10, 20). This can still be an interesting question even when the notion of competency employed is relatively simple. In particular, we consider the competency to take an action (from a finite set) that optimises some quantity, e.g. maximises utility (or reward or fitness), or minimises stress (or frustration or energy), in response to a small signal in this quantity. A mechanism for this notion of agency is not difficult to satisfy at the level of one unit; even a very simple physical model such as a ball rolling downhill over a landscape (with a suitably shaped surface, as we will detail) is sufficient. But the interesting question is whether a collection of units with this competency can organise themselves to create a higher-level agent with comparable competency (21-23). How do multiple self-interested agents at one level of organisation, work together to create agency at a higher level of organisation, thus serving the long-term collective interest of the whole, even when this over-rules the short-term self-interest of the parts? (20).

We thus seek a microscale mechanistic model, complete in determining the behaviour of the system. But we seek to understand a phenomenon that is interesting precisely because a macroscale mechanistic process emerges that changes the outcomes of the system. What does it mean to be a macroscale process if the microscale process completely defines the dynamics of the model? Is it not just an explanatorily-redundant epiphenomenon of the microscale process? These questions are at the heart of agency debates (18). They arise in organismal development and what it means to be a 'self' (2), and in evolutionary transitions and what it means to be an evolutionary unit (9, 10, 13, 24).
In this paper, we build a very simple and abstract model to investigate these questions. Whilst the example model we present omits many features desirable in a general model of agency, it enables us to address some of these conceptual questions clearly.
Our methodology is to use computational models, not as accounts of, or substitutes for, empirical study, but as tools to think with – to explore the logical consequences of different abstract scenarios and general assumptions (25). What follows therefore is not a specific model of development, nor of evolutionary transitions. Rather it is a model that illustrates some general underlying principles involved in multi-scale competencies and transitions, to help us think about what that might mean, and how to make sense of some conceptual difficulties.

[PAGE 3] We use this approach to explore the hypothesis that a transition in agency can occur through adjustments in the timing of decisions. We model a number of agents who each take actions in a 'decision cycle' that repeatedly changes between undecided and decided states. We show that when these decision cycles are not appropriately organised, a collection of agents is unable to exhibit collective action. We illustrate this in a simple scenario where the behaviour of each agent is constrained by pairwise interactions with other agents. Through individual actions, the system quickly reaches a local Nash equilibrium where, even though there exist configurations where many more interactions could be simultaneously satisfied, any unilateral change in the action of a single agent is opposed by interactions with others. Changing from one such equilibrium to another by individual action is therefore not possible (by definition of a local equilibrium) and changing by stochastic multi-agent variations is exponentially unlikely in the distance between equilibria (i.e. requires many specific and simultaneous state changes). In contrast, here we show that when the decision cycles of particular agents are synchronised and the members of this collective enter the undecided state at the same time, the collective exhibits, in this moment, an increased sensitivity to the environment outside the collective, and is thereby able to respond to influences external to the collective and exhibit mass-action that was otherwise unavailable - i.e. an ability to respond begins with inner alignment. This changes the configuration space of behaviours (17), rescaling the dynamics of the system from individual actions to specific collective actions that enable the system to move (in a deterministic, not stochastic, fashion) from one equilibrium to another, moving toward states that resolve more interactions. The structure of this synchronisation (i.e. who is synchronised with whom) implicitly defines the membership of the collective and the identity of the higher-level agent. This would not be a very interesting result if we assumed foreknowledge of who belongs together in a group - the membership of each collective. But importantly, we do not assume this but show that the necessary synchronisation structure can be produced using only individual-based, local information, ‘bottom-up'. Changes in timing do not use foreknowledge of, or any sampling of, the benefit attained by the collective action enabled when the group is fully synchronised. Nonetheless, the collective action that results is specific in enabling the system to change from one equilibrium to another, without visiting intermediate states that are opposed by individual action. In this sense, the model demonstrates a bottom-up transition in agency, exhibiting a new competency at the higher-level without presupposing higher-level selection or a higher-level utility-maximisation process, and demonstrating collective actions.
In the following section we clarify the 'transitions problem' used to illustrate this effect and describe the model of agents and their decision cycles. We then demonstrate the ability to produce a transition in agency, and the change in problem-solving competency that this confers. We provide two versions of the model: one which models utility-maximising strategic agents and one which models fitness-maximising populations. In both cases, the synchronisation that occurs between the decision-cycles of low-level agents under utility/fitness maximisation behaves much like the spontaneous phase synchronisation that occurs between weakly-coupled oscillators (26). We then discuss some implications of our findings for organismic development and its interactions with evolutionary transitions in individuality. Finally, we use this model to discuss some of the conceptual problems of micro- and macro-scale mechanistic processes, and their interpretation for transitions in agency.


[PAGE 4] Model
The transitions problem: Conflict between levels of agency
To concretise the issues involved, we utilise a simple modular coordination game. A familiar example is the driving conventions problem (Box 1). It is easy for the drivers within each country to arrive at a consensus by each driving on the side that minimises the collisions they experience (hence, agreeing with the majority of others in that country). But, as is familiar in the real world, it may be the case that different countries arrive at a different consensus. At this locally optimal state, each driver suffers no collisions with others in their own country, but suffers occasional collisions with foreigners.

Box 1. The driving conventions problem.
Drivers in the same cluster (country) meet one another much more often (thick lines), than drivers in different countries (thin lines) (not all interactions shown). Each individual driver has the competency to drive on the side that minimises the collisions/stress they experience. This is sufficient to produce a local consensus (either all left/green or all right/red depending on the local majority). However, this is only a locally optimal state for the system as a whole since all drivers experience some (less frequent) collisions with drivers in other countries. No one driver can change their decision unilaterally to reduce these collisions. Even a driver in the global minority (red drivers in this example) cannot change because, if acting alone, the cost of increasing their collisions with locals is greater than the benefit of decreasing collisions with foreigners. Two global optima exist, where all collisions are avoided. To escape a local optimum and arrive at (or move toward) a global consensus requires individuals to move against their short-term self-interest (increasing stress/collisions). Note that, if only all the drivers within a country were capable of acting together such that they all changed simultaneously in the right direction (toward the global majority) this would satisfy more external conflicts without creating any internal conflicts. But although an individual driver has the competency to respond to the influence of other drivers, a country is not an agent that has this competency. That is, although a modular constraint structure is part of the problem definition, the agents do not know this structure or who they need to act together with, and a country is not a level of organisation that is able to respond to the influence of its environment (including other countries). It is locked in place, trapped at the local equilibrium, by the pull of its internal stresses. (See Discussion for biological interpretations).

Just like individuals within a country, countries are (in the sense of an average over their components) incentivised to agree with the majority of other countries to reduce collective stress. But just because a country is composed of agential members does not mean that the country is also agential. A country does not have the same agential competency that an individual driver has (minimal though that is); a country is not a thing that is able to take decisions or actions. Intuitively, after arriving at a local equilibrium, a country is unable to ‘change its mind' and move to a different one. How can such collectives acquire the ability to take collective actions that minimise collective stress (precisely those that are composed of many individual actions that, if taken unilaterally, would increase stress)?

For a modular driving conventions problem the interaction strengths (or constraints between drivers) can be defined as follows:

Cij = {1 if [i/k] = [j/k]
       {0.01 otherwise. (Eq. 1)

where i and j∈{1, ... N} are the indexes of the pairwise constraints over N variables, [x] is the floor of the value x, and k is the number of variables in each module ('country').

In the following experiments, we use N=300 and k=10, creating 30 countries of 10 drivers each. Following Hopfield (27, 28), it is useful for such problems to define an energy function describing the extent to which all the constraints in the system are satisfied by the different combinations of discretised unit states:

E(t) = Σᵢⱼ CijSi(t)Sj(t) (Eq. 2)

When the interaction terms are symmetric (cij = cji), as per Eq. 1, the behaviour of a system with discrete states is described by state changes that effect the local minimisation of this energy function, and is guaranteed to arrive at a fixed point (27). Such points correspond to a Nash equilibrium where no unit can increase their utility or reduce stress by changing state unilaterally¹. This means that all drivers easily find agreement with the other drivers within their own country, but not necessarily with those in other countries. With these parameters, there are 2³⁰ different local optima (i.e. the drivers in each of 30 countries will reach one of 2 conventions). Only two of these is globally optimal (i.e. when all drivers in all countries find agreement) (Fig. 1).

¹ The utility of a unit is just the weighted sum of constraints acting on it (Watson, Mill, Buckley 2011a, 2011b) i.e. Ui(t) = Σⱼ CijSi(t)Sj(t). The energy function, Eq. 2, is equivalent to the negation of total utility or the sum of individual utilities.

[PAGE 6] Figure 1: Energy surface of the system. (A) A cross-section through the energy landscape. The energy level of the most common local minima (where 50% of countries take one convention and 50% take the other) is indicated with a dotted red line. The energy level of the global minima is indicated with a solid red line. The energy surface is a sum of local and global components. The local component is derived from only the within-country interactions. The complete energy surface is a sum of these local and global components. (B) A close-up of part of the energy surface. Notice that between point a (one of the local optima) and point b (the closest local optimum to a in the direction of the global optimum) there are 10 units that need to change state. To change one unit at a time would mean climbing up the energy barrier caused by the strong within-country interactions (solid red), i.e. this moves against short-term self-interest (increasing stress) even though it would serve their long-term collective interest to be at b. Notice that if somehow this energy barrier were temporarily removed there would remain a downward gradient between a and b caused by the between-country interactions.

Considering this kind of two-scale energy function², one way to understand our aim is to describe a dynamical system that changes how it behaves from one scale to the other: before the transition it follows individual gradients (and is unable to follow the global gradient), whereas after the transition it follows the global gradient (ignoring individual gradients). A system that transitions in this way must exhibit specific coordinated collective action to overcome the pull of the individual-level stress gradient, and in so doing will be able to move through the energy landscape to the global optimum unhindered. This gives an outcome equivalent to actions that favour long-term collective outcomes even though these over-rule the short-term individual outcomes that otherwise trap the system at a local equilibrium.

The possibility of long-term collective gains suggests that if only some suitably structured relationships could be put in place, to alter the short-term incentives or responses of the parts in the right way, these would be to everyone's benefit in the long-term. For example, mandated driving regulations (that over-rule individual choices). However, such relationships need to coordinate actions among many parts simultaneously. A partially constructed relationship structure can therefore be worse than none because changing only some of the parts (e.g. a country with a fraction of the drivers using the foreign convention) is worse than staying as you are. So even if such relationships or incentive modifiers (see also 'individuating traits' in an evolutionary process (29)) were identifiable in principle, and beneficial when fully established, this does not on its own explain how self-interested individuals could create such organised relationships bottom-up through individual incentives (10). A bottom-up account is necessary because a microscale mechanistic model for transitions in agency must operate without presupposing the higher-level agency it intends to explain.

Note that the existence of locally optimal states depends on the relative frequency of intra-cluster and inter-cluster interactions. If the rate of inter-cluster interactions is assumed to be sufficiently high, then there are no local optima in the dynamics and there is no problem for higher-level agency to solve. For example, consider the convergence effect of increased gene flow between sub-populations, or consensus achieved via increased contact rate in other coordination games or consensus-finding scenarios (30). However, it is not the ease of finding consensus (under individual action) that we are interested in: It is the problem-solving competency of a cluster – the ability to enact specific collective action despite the presence of local optima that prevent such actions for the individual agents. Such collective action has the potential to collapse the effective dimensionality of the system dynamics, creating a new macro-scale process that searches combinations of module-configurations (in the same way that the micro-scale process searched combinations of individual units before the transition).

² Biological organisms often exhibit many levels of agency but here we focus on a simple case of just one level of emergent agency to understand and clarify sufficient dynamics. Also natural biological interactions will most likely have interactions of various different strengths, exhibiting complex (sometimes unresolvable) frustrations - whereas, here we are using a problem with neat, non-overlapping modules ('countries'), and consistent constraints (i.e. there exists a configuration where all constraints can be resolved simultaneously). Although these modules clearly prescribe the boundaries of the collectives that form, it is still necessary for a bottom-up process to identify where they are and form relationships, with the necessary members, that facilitate higher-level agency.

[PAGE 7] So, what would it take for a collective to self-organise such that it transitions from not having this basic competency to a new level of agency that does have this competency? How is membership in a collective identified bottom-up? What kind of relationships would cause them to act together, maximising long-term collective utility instead of short-term individual utility? And how do the necessary relationships arise given that relationships producing partial collective action are worse than none?

[PAGE 7] Units, decision cycles and interactions

We explore the behaviour of individuals, units, that have a simple ability to decide an action (e.g., which side to drive on) and a 'decision cycle' that enables them to repeatedly return to an undecided state where they can decide again (Fig. 2). A Newtonian mechanics model, like that depicted by Waddington (31, 32)³ to represent developmental differentiation, is sufficient. Specifically, a ball rolling downhill and passing a saddle point causes it to branch left or right.

³ This is used in many models of development, including cell-cell communication (33-36).

[PAGE 8] Figure 2: Decision cycle of a unit. A unit's state, si, is represented by a ball rolling over a surface. The ball is repeatedly reset to the saddle point (top) and rolls downhill, branching left (si=-1) or right (si=+1) depending on the gradient it experiences at the saddle point. The gradient is determined by the weighted sum of influences from other units (Eq. 4). The magnitude of the state is amplified/decayed by Yi(t) as the ball rolls downhill/is reset uphill. The timing of the decision cycle is controlled by θi.

[PAGE 8] Figure 3: State dynamics of a unit. The state of a unit, si, changes over time according to:
si(t+1) = si(t) + di(t) (JUi(t)/dsi(t)) + Yi(t) (Eq. 3)
where di(t) = 0.01 is a constant controlling the rate of change of state, and Yi(t) = -0.1sin(ωt + θi) controls the amplification/decay cycle. Specifically, when Yi(t) > 0 the magnitude of the state is amplified (b in Fig. 2), and when Yi(t) < 0 the state is decayed back toward zero (a in Fig. 2). ω = 0.05 is a constant controlling the frequency of the decision cycle. θi is the phase of unit i, controlling when it is sensitive and when it is acting.

For multiple interacting units, where cij is the interaction strength of unit sj on unit si, the inputs to each unit involves a weighted sum of influences from all units (including itself):

∂Ui(t)/∂si(t) = Σⱼ CijSj(t) (Eq. 4)

where variables are defined as per Eq. 3. Note that Yi(t) continues to control the amplification/decay cycle as before, using the θi of that unit (initialised randomly for each unit, see below).

What is interesting about the model is not the individual units but rather the behaviour of many units in interaction with each other, and how the organisation of the timing relationships between them facilitates a transition in agency. This Newtonian model is adopted rather than an explicit selection-based or utility-maximisation model for two reasons: i) to make the point that nothing 'clever' is required on the part of an individual agent (i.e. its behaviours can be described by only a simple microscale equation of motion) and ii) because it is necessary that making a decision (rolling down the hill) is not an instantaneous event (an argmax model of utility maximisation is insufficient). Specifically, in the initial part of the decision-cycle the unit is not acting strongly (its output is not amplified) but it is sensitive to the influences of its inputs as it approaches the decision point. We can think of the inputs as tilting the decision surface slightly in favour of left or right. In the latter part of the decision cycle, after the bifurcation, the unit is no longer sensitive to its inputs (i.e. a slight tilt is not sufficient to move it from one basin to the other) but it is acting strongly (its outputs are amplified strongly enough to produce detectable 'tilting' influences on others) (see a and b in Fig. 2 and Fig. 3).

The back-and-fore between a state where an individual is sensitive to the world (but not acting) and a period where it is acting on the world (but not sensitive) is a key aspect of the model. This view of agency assumes that a system is either responding to its internal motives or to external influences and when it is doing one it cannot be doing the other. That is, being sensitive to one's environment means necessarily that you are not entirely determined by your internal state; and taking action on the world means that you are driven by your internal state, to exactly the extent that you are not sensitive to external influences. Both sensitivity and action are necessary to be an agent, but simply adding up internal and external influences is insufficient for agential behaviour because this will lead to either to one overpowering the other or to an intermediate equilibrium of inaction where internal and external motives balance. Sometimes agency is modelled with the assumption that there are separate input (sensor) and output (effector) channels (22, 37, 38). But without presupposing such distinct one-way interfaces, and way for a system to be both sensitive and active is to move back and fore between taking (insensitive) action and being (inactively) sensitive. This allows for a system to be informed by world (reading the state of the environment and allowing its internal state to be changed by it) and to do work on the world (change the state of the world according to its internal state).

However, simply being able to repeatedly re-decide multiple times is not sufficient to solve the transitions problem. Specifically, if drivers make decisions in an asynchronous fashion, each driver will simply decide again to agree with the local consensus. The individual agency of the parts precludes the collective agency of the whole by holding it at a local equilibrium. This is what makes countries unable to take actions/to move to a different attractor.

[PAGE 9] The hard problem of transitions

What kind of systemic change could produce a transition in the behaviour of the system so that countries become agential in the same way as the drivers they contain (i.e. able to choose between aggregate states that better-satisfy total stress)? One possibility is that if the components were arranged or organised differently then, given that their actions are context sensitive, they might make different decisions. This is the principle, for example, which enables an increased level of cooperation when interactions in social games are positively assorted, i.e. changing the interaction structure changes the incentives that an individual experiences (39). But, for a self-contained systematic model, we do not want to presuppose an interaction structure that produces collective action. Neither should an interaction structure depend on fortuitous happenstance provided by exogenous environmental factors (40). Rather it must be caused by the incentives of the individual components - they change their own interaction structure ‘bottom-up' (41, 42).

However, if we suppose that individuals change their own interaction structure, then we have a new problem. If the changes to interaction structure that benefit long-term collective outcomes also benefit short-term individual outcomes, then it makes sense that individuals create those structures. However, in this case these structures align with what individuals are already doing, and the collective structure is explanatorily redundant (it doesn't change behavioural outcomes) (9). Conversely, if the changes to interaction structure that benefit collective action are opposed by individual incentives (as is necessary for the collective to change behavioural outcomes), then individuals would not create that structure. And if neither of these is true, if changes to interaction structure are orthogonal to and hence have no effect on individual benefits, then again, there is no reason for individuals to create them (except by fortuitous happenstance). Is there any way out of this puzzle? How can individual incentives explain the creation of an interaction structure that 'forces' individuals to do something they don't already want to do (20)? How can a transition be both systematic and meaningful (i.e. driven by bottom-up incentives and yet change behavioural outcomes)? We call this the hard problem of transitions in agency.

[PAGE 9-10] Here we explore one solution to this hard problem: namely, changes to interaction structures that control *when* individuals decide, not *what* they decide. In general, changes to timing do not directly control which actions individuals take (e.g. being caused to take action A, say, over action B), but simply modify when actions are taken (e.g. being caused to decide between A and B at time t₁, say, over making this decision at time t₂). Changes to the timing of individual decisions have the interesting characteristic that they can provide (small) immediate benefits to individuals without changing their decisions in that moment (i.e. they are aligned with current decisions) which means they are aligned with individual decisions and can arise systematically. Nonetheless, these changes do not commit individuals to their current decision in the long term either (because they do not control what the decision is at all), in fact, in a subtle way, they do the opposite and can thereby alter subsequent decisions in beneficial ways, as we will see. Thus changes to timing can be both systematic (because they are aligned with individual benefits at the time they are made) and meaningful with respect to altering behavioural outcomes (at other times).

[PAGE 10] Entraining decision-cycles

If individual units are allowed to modify the timing of their decision cycles they will adjust them to locally maximise their utility or decrease stress. Since changes to timing are sensitive to combinations of behaviours and changes to behaviour are sensitive to differences in timing, this results in a simple form of positive feedback loosely analogous to the natural phase synchronisation, or entrainment, of weakly coupled oscillators (26).

Specifically, each unit, at a particular time t, has a phase, θi(t), that controls the timing of their decisions (Eq. 2). Initial values are drawn randomly, uniformly in the range θi(t=0) =[-π:π). The θ value of each unit is then incrementally adjusted on the following principle. Two units at time t that take actions si and sj benefit from mutual synergy, e.g. due to taking mutually compatible actions, in proportion to their agreement with the interaction cij between them; specifically, Cijsi(t)sj(t). This quantity is positive if their signs are compatible with the sign of the interaction cij, and its magnitude is increasing with the magnitude of each unit. Each state magnitude is a function of its phase, governed by Yi(t) and di(t). Over a given period t₁ to t₂, such as a complete decision cycle of a unit, the cumulative synergy is increasing with the integral of cijsi(t)sj(t), and this is therefore affected by the phase difference between the states, θi(t) - θj(t). If two units have states that resolve the interaction between them (i.e. Cijsi(t)sj(t)>0), then the cumulative synergy available to a unit is increased when their phase difference is decreased, i.e. when they synchronise. A unit that can adjust its phase is therefore incentivised to adjust it toward other units with whom it is currently benefiting from mutual synergy in proportion to the magnitude of that synergy. The net movement in θ is determined by the total synergy with all other units at that time (integrated over a decision cycle). At a local optimum in the state dynamics, some pairs of units will have states that agree with the interaction between them, these attract θ values toward synchronisation in proportion to the magnitude of cij. This principle is described by the following equation of motion (see Appendix A):

θi(t+1) = θi(t) + ν Σⱼ Cij Sgn(Si(t)Sj(t)) sin(θj(t) - θi(t)) (Eq. 5)

where v =3.10⁻⁵ is a constant controlling the rate of change of phase. Notice that this equation also allows for increases in phase difference (anti-synchronisation) when CijSi(t)Sj(t) < 0, so synchronisation only increases when states are compatible (i.e. their combination satisfies the interaction constraints they experience, on average over all the interactions they participate in). This incentive to synchronise is therefore not immediately apparent from the value of cij per se but requires units to first find an equilibrium under individual action (in the case where interactions are frustrated, establishing appropriate synchronisation may require sampling many such equilibria, as in previous work (43-47)).

[PAGE 10-11] Let us look more closely at the two-way interaction between the decisions that are made (s values) and when they are made (θ values) or more exactly, between combinations of s values (correlated decisions) and combinations of θ values (phase differences). Recall that an agent must change back and fore between being sensitive (but inactive) and being active (but insensitive). This means that when agents adjust their timing to synchronise their activity, they also synchronise their inactivity - the moments when they are sensitive - and when agents are inactive and sensitive at the same time this has an interesting consequence. First, how does behaviour influence timing? If two units are already in agreement, synergy is maximised by synchronising their timing (this does not change their decisions at the time). The units that matter the most to changes in timing are the ones with the strongest agreement in s - in effect, units that decide together wire together – to imitate the Hebbian principle of associative learning seen in many networks with plastic interaction structure (48-53). In the other direction, how does timing influence behaviour? When a unit is undecided, it is not taking any action that cannot influence any other unit. If a pair of units act asynchronously then when one is sensitive it responds to the action of the other, and vice versa, which means their attention is on each other - or the memory of the collective state is held in these mutual and reciprocal influences. For example, I drive on the left because it was the best thing for me to do given what you were doing when I decided, and you drive on the left because it was the best thing for you to do given what I was doing when you decided. It is this circular or reciprocal state holding that prevents countries from being able to change their collective decision. Furthermore, this mutual amplification is most synergistic or beneficial to the participants when they are synchronised. But if synchronised, then a group of units are all sensitive (and inactive) at the same time, which means this mutual attention on each other is amplified at one part of the cycle and at the other side of the cycle this attention is momentarily broken – they have no influence on each other in this moment, and the memory is lost. In this moment of inner calm, the only remaining influence is from those that we are not synchronised with, i.e. the 'out-group'. In short, synchronisation changes the 'attention' from themselves to their environment - from the ingroup to the outgroup. It is this that will allow the group to change its collective decision, as we will see. In short, the most important and reliably satisfied groups of states experience the strongest pull to synchronise, but whilst this amplifies the short-term benefit they receive from their mutual interactions, it also decreases their commitment to this decision; making it easier for them to escape the attractor created by their strong mutual influence.

[PAGE 11] Evolving higher-level agency

The self-organisation dynamics described in Eq. 5 are relatively abstract but can be interpreted biologically. Here we aimed to test whether the same dynamics could be achieved by natural selection, in a simple setting. This evolutionary version of the model is implemented in the framework of adaptive dynamics. The system is composed of several populations (each corresponding to one unit) interacting with each other in the same coordination game described above. All the individuals within a population i have their own values for the heritable trait θi, and the phenotype Si(t) displayed by each individual is computed by Eq. 3 based on the value of this trait (the Left/Right decision is therefore a plastic phenotype, determined by environmental context, and the only thing that selection can do to influence this is to change the timing of the process). The fitness of each individual is given by Eq. 2 as the utility value, based on their phenotype and the average phenotypes of other populations. In other words, the influence on a given individual coming from other individuals (in the same population or some other) are modelled in an aggregated way for each population. Mutations on trait θ are considered under strong selection weak mutation assumptions such that they are rare enough that they happen one at a time, and the fixation or loss of each mutation occurs before the next mutation arises. The adaptive dynamics thus models each population as homogeneous, represented by an average θ value and an average state.

Given these simplifications, the evolution of the system can be modelled as follows. The initial state of the system is composed of N populations whose θ values are randomly drawn in [-π,π). Then, the simulation consists of iterations of mutation and selection on