[PAGE 1] Serotonin Transporter Function Is an
Early Step in Left-Right Patterning in
Chick and Frog Embryos

Key Words
Serotonin 5-Hydroxytryptamine Serotonin
transporter. Vesicular monoamine transporter •
Left-right asymmetry Xenopus. Chick

Abstract
The neurotransmitter serotonin has been shown to reg-
ulate a number of embryonic patterning events in addi-
tion to its crucial role in the nervous system. Here, we
examine the role of two serotonin transporters, the plas-
ma membrane serotonin transporter (SERT) and the ve-
sicular monoamine transporter (VMAT), in embryonic
left-right asymmetry. Pharmacological or genetic inhibi-
tors of either SERT or VMAT specifically randomized the
laterality of the heart and viscera in Xenopus embryos.
This effect takes place during cleavage stages, and is up-
stream of the left-sided gene XNR-1. Targeted microin-
jection of an SERT-dominant negative construct con-
firmed the necessity for SERT function in embryonic
laterality and revealed that the descendants of the right
ventral blastomere are the most dependant upon SERT
signaling in left-right patterning. Moreover, the impor-
tance of SERT and VMAT in laterality is conserved in
chick embryos, being upstream of the early left-sided
gene Shh. Endogenous transcripts of SERT and VMAT
are expressed from the initiation of the primitive streak
in chick and are asymmetrically expressed in Hensen's
node. Taken together our data characterize two new
right-sided markers in chick gastrulation, identify a nov-
el, early component of the left-right pathway in two ver-
tebrate species, and reveal a new biological role for se-
rotonin transport.


[PAGE 1] Introduction
The indoleamine serotonin (5-hydroxytryptamine or
5-HT) is a neurotransmitter that regulates psychodynamic
function [Lucki, 1998]. It is linked to a variety of diverse
medical conditions including tumor growth [Yim et al.,
2000; Meijer et al., 2003; Russo et al., 2003], circadian
rhythm disorders [Morin, 1999], and cardiac disease
[Frishman and Grewall, 2000]. Its crucial role in controlling
neuronal activity [Lucki, 1998] has allowed it to be direct-
ly implicated in both normal cognition and a number of
syndromes such as memory impairment [Buhot et al.,
2000], sleep disorders [Jouvet, 1999], schizophrenia [Mil-
lan, 2000], aggression [Lesch and Merschdorf, 2000], de-
pression [Stockmeier, 1997], and other mood disorders.
It is now appreciated that serotonin has another crucial
role: control of morphogenesis during early stages, prior
to the appearance of neurons [Buznikov and Shmukler,
1981; Whitaker-Azmitia et al., 1996; Buznikov et al.,
2001]. Serotonin is widely distributed in both the animal
and the plant kingdoms [Pennati et al., 2001], and occurs
in mammalian [Shuey et al., 1990; Wu et al., 1999] and
other vertebrate and invertebrate embryos [Manukhin et
al., 1981; Emanuelsson et al., 1988]. Serotonin is synthe-
sized by embryonic stem cells [Walther, 1999], and 5-HT
is likely to play a role in egg maturation [Buznikov et al.,
1993], mitogen-induced vascular remodeling [Fanburg
and Lee, 1997], neural crest migration [Moiseiwitsch and
Lauder, 1995], control of cleavage and cell division rates,
patterning of cytoskeletal structures [Emanuelsson et al.,
1988; Lee et al., 1991], blastomere adhesion, gastrulation
movements [Hamalainen and Kohonen, 1989; Colas et
al., 1999a, b], control of gap-junctional communication
[Moore and Burt, 1995; Rorig and Sutor, 1996], cranio-
facial patterning [Lauder and Zimmerman, 1988; Shuey
et al., 1992, 1993], and the specification of neuronal iden-
tity and connectivity in the developing nervous system
[Lauder et al., 1981, 1983]. Indeed, links between the use
of 5-HT pathway pharmaceuticals and birth defects sug-
gest that these roles may exist in human embryos as well,
making it crucial to understand mechanisms of serotonin
function in development [Lauder, 1985; Chambers et al.,
1996; Moiseiwitsch, 2000].

[PAGE 2] The understanding of nonneuronal functions of sero-
tonin is a very important yet poorly understood aspect of
evolutionary developmental biology, and significant mo-
lecular advances have been made in understanding the
molecular cell biology of serotonin. The serotonin path-
way [Cooper et al., 1996] includes the enzymes which
synthesize 5-HT from tryptophan, seven major types of
membrane receptors which transduce the serotonin sig-
nal into different cellular events (5-HT R1-R7), and a
system for enzymatic degradation of 5-HT [via mono-
amine oxidase (MAO)]. There are also two important
families of serotonin transporters.
Free 5-HT cannot remain in the cytosol because it is
catabolized by MAO on the outer membranes of mito-
chondria [Gershon et al., 1990]. To avoid degradation
and provide for vesicular release, 5-HT is transported
into vesicles through the action of the vesicular mono-
amine transporter (VMAT) [Kirk et al., 1997]. VMAT
(VMAT2 in neurons, and VMAT1 in other tissues) uses
proton gradients generated by the V-ATPase [Harvey,
1992] to drive transport exchanging two protons in the
lumen of the vesicle for one monoamine in the cytoplasm
[Knoth, 1981a, b; Kanner, 1987; Edwards, 1992]. The
vesicles release 5-HT from cells through exocytosis; once
in the extracellular space, 5-HT is available to diffuse and
be sensed by serotonin receptors on the membrane of
neighboring cells.
In contrast to VMAT, plasma membrane serotonin
transporters (SERTs) use the Na+ gradient to remove
transmitter from synapses [Haase et al., 2001; Torres et
al., 2003]. SERT is an extremely important regulator of
nervous system activity and is thus a very popular target
for pharmaceutical efforts in biomedicine [Owens and
Nemeroff, 1998; Schloss and Williams, 1998; Bartlett et
al., 2005; Noblett and Coccaro, 2005]; this work has led
to the development of a number of selective serotonin
reuptake inhibitors, of which Prozac is a leading example
[Wong et al., 1995]. Interestingly, SERT function has also
been implicated in embryonic morphogenesis [Shuey et
al., 1992; Persico et al., 2000, 2001; Gaspar et al., 2003]
and the regulation of cell proliferation [Eddahibi et al.,
2001; Sari and Zhou, 2003]. In light of the fascinating yet
largely unexplored roles for neurotransmitter signaling in
embryogenesis, and the importance of transporters in reg-
ulating serotonin movement, it is interesting to explore
possible roles of SERT and VMAT in the patterning of
major body axes.
Invariant left-right (LR) asymmetry is a key feature of
vertebrate morphogenesis that raises profound questions
in cell, evolutionary, and developmental biology [Palmer,
2004; Levin, 2005]. It also has important implications for
the biomedicine of laterality-based birth defects [Burn,
1991; Casey and Hackett, 2000; Morelli et al., 2001].
Within the last 10 years, insight at the molecular level has
been gained into the mechanisms which underlie consis-
tent laterality of the heart and viscera during embryonic
development [Wood, 1997; Yost, 2001]. While the mid-
dle phase of LR patterning (the asymmetric gene cascade)
is fairly well understood [Levin, 1998; Whitman and
Mercola, 2001], upstream events and their conservation
among species present many open questions [Burdine
and Schier, 2000; Boorman and Shimeld, 2002; Levin,
2003b]. Seeking to discover epigenetic mechanisms and
small molecule signals functioning upstream of the asym-
metric gene cascade, we have recently shown that seroto-
nergic signaling through receptor subtypes 3 and 4, at very
early stages, was a crucial component of the LR pathway
in chick and frog embryos [Fukumoto et al., 2005]. How-
ever, the possible functions of transporters – a crucial
element of serotonin signaling – had remained unex-
plored. Thus, we sought to characterize possible roles of
5-HT transport in determination of consistent laterality.
Here, we show that both SERT and VMAT are involved
in LR patterning at early stages in two vertebrate species.
Taken together, our data identify novel roles for serotonin

[PAGE 3] transporters, reveal a new conserved component of LR
patterning, and suggest another possible teratological
endpoint for the use of SERT modulators during preg-
nancy.

[PAGE 3] Materials and Methods
Cloning
Chick SERT. RNA was isolated from whole chicken embryos
at stage 23 by TRI-Reagent extraction (Molecular Research Cen-
ter). Reverse transcription of total RNA was performed with Su-
perscript II (Invitrogen). PCR amplification of a 139-bp SERT can-
didate fragment was carried out using EX-Taq (Takara) with de-
generate primers (5'-TTRGGITACTGYATHGGIACITC-3' and
5'-CCACAIGGHATTTCIGTIGGTGT-3'). PCR was performed
using the following cycle conditions: denaturation for 1 min at
94°C, annealing for 1 min, and extension for 1.5 min at 72°C with
final extension for 15 min. The annealing temperatures of cycles 1,
2, and 3-30 were 42°C, 46°C, and 59°C, respectively. The frag-
ments were cloned into pCR2.1 using the TOPO cloning kit (Invi-
trogen), then sequenced. The resulting sequence was used to design
primers for targeting other regions. After determination of the com-
plete cDNA sequence, a highly conserved stretch of the cDNA
(aa 291-671) was amplified by PCR using specific primers:
CSERT (870–): 5'-ATTAGCTGGCAATTGACCCTCTG, and
CSERTEnd: 5'-TTACACGGCATTCATGCGGATGT. This frag-
ment was used for in situ hybridization after being transferred into
the pBluescript expression vector. This sequence was the same as
the previously cloned GenBank sequence AY573844 [Larsen et al.,
2004].
Chick VMAT. RNA was isolated from whole chicken embryos
at stage 23 by TRI-Reagent extraction (Molecular Research Cen-
ter). Reverse transcription of total RNA was performed with Su-
perscript II (Invitrogen). PCR amplification of a 276-bp VMAT
candidate fragment was carried out using EX-Taq (Takara) with
degenerate primers (5'-ATCTGGATGATGGARACIATGTG-3'
and 5'-TAGCCCATDATIGGCATCATIGA-3'). PCR was per-
formed using the following cycle conditions: denaturation for 1 min
at 94°C, annealing for 1 min, and extension for 1 min at 72°C with
final extension for 15 min. The annealing temperatures of cycles 1,
2, and 3-30 were 45°C, 48°C, and 59°C, respectively. The frag-
ments were cloned into pCR2.1 using the TOPO cloning kit (Invi-
trogen), then sequenced. The resulting sequence was used to design
primers for targeting other regions. After determination of the com-
plete cDNA sequence, a highly conserved stretch of the cDNA
(aa 263-461) was amplified by PCR using specific primers: CVMAT
(785-): 5'-TGGCTCTGTTCGATGGAGCTGTT, and cVMAT
(-1381): 5′-CTATAATTGTCATGAGCCATGGA. This fragment,
matching VMAT2, was used for in situ hybridization after being
transferred into the pBluescript expression vector. This sequence
has been submitted to GenBank under the accession number
AY974771.
Xenopus Drug Exposure
Xenopus embryos were dejellied in 2% cysteine 30 min after
artificial fertilization and washed in 0.1 × Marc's modified Ringer's
solution (MMR). Batches of eggs from a single female were divided
into several experimental and control groups. Each group was put
into either 10 ml of 0.1 × MMR (controls) or 0.1 × MMR contain-
ing nisoxetine, fluoxetine, alaproclate, citalopram, imipramine, re-
serpine, and TBZOH at a final concentration of 10 μM, 10 μΜ,
10 μ.Μ, 10 μΜ, 10 μΜ, 100 μΜ, and 10 μΜ, respectively. Em-
bryos were allowed to develop in the drug-containing medium un-
til stage 16 [Nieuwkoop and Faber, 1967], at which point they were
washed three times in 0.1 × MMR and allowed to develop in 0.1 x
MMR + 0.1% gentamicin until stage 45. All compounds were ob-
tained from Sigma-RBI and Tocris.
Scoring Xenopus Embryonic Situs
The phenotype of embryos was determined by scoring the situs
(position) of the stomach, the gallbladder, and the atrium of the
heart, under a dissecting microscope using tricaine to immobilize
the stage 45 embryos. Only embryos with normal dorsoanterior
development (dorsoanterior index = 5) and clearly left-sided or
right-sided organs of normal morphology were scored. Embryos
with ambiguous (unscoreable) situs comprised less than 5% of each
experiment. An embryo was considered to be affected when one or
more of those three organs was/were reversed in its position. The
incidences of abnormal organ situs were analyzed using the x² test
with Pearson correction for sample size. Statistically, if the sided-
ness of all three organs were independently and fully randomized,
the maximum possible effect would be 87.5%, since 12.5% of the
embryos would be scored as wild type (because all three organs
would lie in their normal positions by chance).
Chick Drug Exposure
All experimental manipulations were performed on standard
pathogen-free white leghorn chick embryos obtained from Charles
River Laboratories (SPAFAS). Embryos were staged according to
Hamburger and Hamilton [1992]. To perform a pharmacological
screen with minimal disturbance of normal morphogenesis, we op-
timized a chicken in ovo culture system. A small hole was made on
the top of each egg (prior to incubation), and approximately 5 ml
of light albumin were removed. The experimental solution con-
sisted of a pharmacological reagent (final concentration: fluoxetine
100 μ.Μ, reserpine 100 µM) in chicken light albumin and Pannett-
Compton solution at a ratio of 5:1. This was replaced into the egg,
the eggs were securely wrapped with Scotch tape, and were incu-
bated at 37.5°C to the desired stages, at which point they were fixed
for analysis of laterality markers by in situ hybridization.
In situ Hybridization
Chick embryos were fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde at 4°C over-
night. Frog embryos were fixed in MEMFA at 4°C overnight. cDNA
used as template for in situ hybridization with marker probes were:
cShh and cNodal [Levin et al., 1995], and XNodal [Sampath et al.,
1997]. Histological sections were obtained by embedding embryos
after in situ hybridization in JB4 according to the manufacturer's
directions (Polysciences). In situ hybridization was performed as
previously described [Harland, 1991].
Xenopus Blastomere Injection
Synthetic mRNA was transcribed by the T7 polymerase from
linearized PCDNA3 plasmids containing the D98G mutant of
SERT. About 100 pg of the construct mRNA were mixed with 50 ng
of RLD and 250 pg of mRNA encoding β-galactosidase (as lineage
label) and injected into the blastomere indicated.


[PAGE 4] Results
Specific Inhibitors of SERT and VMAT Induce
Heterotaxia in Xenopus Embryos
To determine whether SERT function was important
for laterality, we capitalized on the highly specific and
well-characterized pharmacological reagents developed
by recent efforts in biomedical neuroscience [Ramasub-
bu, 2004]. Following the same strategy recently used to
identify electrogenic [Levin et al., 2002] and serotonergic
[Fukumoto et al., 2005] components in asymmetry, we
sought to take advantage of the large numbers of frog em-
bryos available, the low background level of heterotaxia,
and the well-characterized and specific blockers of SERT
and VMAT to implicate these targets for further molecu-
lar functional analysis.
Batches of at least 100 Xenopus embryos were exposed
to one of the SERT blockers, i.e. fluoxetine [Wong et al.,
1995], imipramine [Goulet et al., 2001], citalopram
[Horschitz et al., 2001], or alaproclate [Fowler et al.,
1987], or the VMAT inhibitors reserpine [Costa et al.,
1977] or TBZOH [Zucker et al., 2001], from fertilization
to stage 16. Embryos were then washed, allowed to de-
velop to stage 45, and analyzed for the situs of the heart,
gut, and gallbladder. The data are shown in figure 1A. The
incidence of reversal of one or more of the three organs

[PAGE 5] from their normal situs (fig. 1B) was scored (fig. 1C). In
this assay (scoring the situs of three organs), the maxi-
mum possible incidence of laterality phenotypes that can
be detected is 87.5% (because in a set of embryos in which
each of three organs is fully randomized, 12.5% will have
the organs in their wild-type positions by chance and thus
be scored as normal). The detailed data are presented in
tables 1 and 2.
In all cases, at the low micromolar levels of blockers
utilized, the only observed effect was the independent
randomization of the position of the heart and visceral
organs. Strictly, the phenotype we observed was hetero-
taxia (an independent assortment of the organs – a loss
of concordance), since single-organ reversals were ob-
served as well as inversions of all three or any two organs.
No general toxicity was observed; in particular, special
attention was given to avoiding reagents which caused
changes in dorsoanterior character, to prevent confound-
ing results with nonspecific secondary effects on the LR
axis [Danos and Yost, 1996]. In all of the data given in
subsequent sections of the results, the heterotaxia pheno-
type is specific (is not accompanied by other morpholog-
ical defects).
Control batches of embryos exposed to vehicle alone
exhibited a background level of 1% heterotaxia; likewise,
embryos exposed to nisoxetine, a selective inhibitor of
norepinephrine uptake [Python et al., 1997], exhibited
normal laterality (table 1). In contrast, embryos exposed
to SERT or VMAT blockers exhibited a significant level
of heterotaxia – an average of 24% for SERT blockers,
and 28% for VMAT blockers. Based on this loss-of-func-
tion data, serotonin transport is implicated in the estab-
lishment of LR asymmetry in Xenopus.

[PAGE 5] Table 1. SERT blockers significantly randomize LR asymmetry

Control embryos or embryos exposed to nisoxetine exhibited normal asymmetry. In contrast, embryos exposed to blockers of SERT
from fertilization to stage 16 and scored at stage 45 for the laterality of the heart, gut, and gallbladder exhibited between 18 and 29%
incidence of heterotaxia (reversals of one or more of the heart, gut, or gallbladder).


Table 2. VMAT blocker significantly
randomizes LR asymmetry

In contrast to controls, embryos exposed to VMAT blockers from fertilization to stage
16 and scored at stage 45 for the laterality of the heart, gut, and gallbladder exhibited 27-
29% incidence of heterotaxia (reversals of one or more of the heart, gut, or gallbladder).


[PAGE 5] SERT and VMAT Function during Early
Embryogenesis in Xenopus

In order to determine what aspects of LR patterning
might depend upon SERT or VMAT, we exposed em-
bryos to specific blockers at different stages of develop-
ment. We analyzed the results of exposures beginning at
different time points (tables 3 and 4). We observed
(fig. 1D) that exposure during cleavage stages resulted in
the most effective level of randomization (20% for the
VMAT inhibitor, 27% for the SERT inhibitor), while lat-
er exposures resulted in low or insignificant levels of dis-
turbance of laterality. These data suggest that SERT and
VMAT function in early steps of LR patterning, taking
place between fertilization and stage 7.

To establish epistasis between serotonin transport and
known LR patterning components, we assayed the ex-
pression of XNR-1, the earliest asymmetric marker
known in Xenopus, in embryos exposed to SERT and
VMAT blockers as above. The data and statistical analy-
ses are presented in table 5. Control embryos exhibited
the normally left-sided expression of XNR-1, while em-
bryos exposed to fluoxetine and reserpine exhibited re-
spectively 26 and 28% bilateral expression of XNR-1.
The bilateral expression of XNR-1 was exactly the same
as previously described [Lohr et al., 1997; Levin and
Mercola, 1998; Levin et al., 2002; Bunney et al., 2003;
Fukumoto et al., 2005]. Thus, we conclude that the func-
tions of SERT and VMAT in the LR pathway are up-
stream of the asymmetric gene cascade as it is known in
Xenopus embryos.


[PAGE 6] Molecular Loss of Function of SERT Reveals an
Asymmetry among Blastomeres

The pharmacological reagents are useful for implicat-
ing targets for molecular analysis, and for testing the tim-
ing of serotonin transport in embryonic patterning. We
next sought to use a specific molecular reagent to confirm
the involvement of SERT in Xenopus embryogenesis. Be-
cause SERT proteins must form homomultimers [Chen
et al., 1997a, b, 1998; Smicun et al., 1999; Chen and Rud-
nick, 2000; Sitte et al., 2004], a nonfunctional SERT mu-
tant which reaches the cell surface but does not perform
serotonin transport would serve as a dominant negative
mutant by titrating out wild-type SERT complexes [Bark-
er et al., 1999; Ramsey and DeFelice, 2002]. We thus
utilized the D98G mutant, which has been tested in Xe-
nopus oocytes, to explore the dominant negative effects
of SERT [Barker et al., 1999; Ramsey and DeFelice,
2002].

We microinjected synthetic, capped mRNA encoding
the SERT D98G mutant into each blastomere of frog em-
bryos at the 4-cell stage. The data and statistical analyses
are presented in table 6. Misexpression of this dominant
negative form of SERT induced 18% randomization of
the organs when injected into the right ventral cell. Tar-
geting the other cells produced less effect; the embryos
injected in the right dorsal side exhibited half (9%) as
much heterotaxia, while the left dorsal and ventral cells
exhibited 6–7% heterotaxia. These data confirm the im-
portance of SERT function in early embryogenesis, and
reveal that the descendants of the right ventral blastomere
are likely to be the major locus of SERT function in the
LR pathway.


[PAGE 6] SERT and VMAT Are Expressed in the Primitive
Streak in Early Chick Embryos

In order to test the evolutionary conservation of this
novel mechanism, and explore its properties in a model
system with a radically different gastrulation architec-
ture, we sought to ask whether SERT and VMAT may be
present endogenously in chick embryos prior to the ex-
pression of Shh (before the development of serotonergic
neurons). To test this prediction and characterize the
involvement of SERT and VMAT in LR-relevant pro-
cesses, we cloned and examined the expression of native
chick SERT and VMAT during gastrulation.

Using degenerate primers based on alignment of mam-
malian sequences, we cloned chick SERT and VMAT,
which respectively had 91 and 84% homology to the
mouse homologs at the amino acid level. In situ hybrid-
ization with a probe antisense to cVMAT revealed no
expression prior to incubation (fig. 2A); expression be-
gan at the initiation of the primitive streak (fig. 2B) and
continued throughout the streak during its elongation
(fig. 2C, D). Sectioning revealed that it was the mesoder-
mal cells which expressed VMAT, and that cells some-
what lateral to the streak also expressed VMAT (fig. 2E).
At stages 4–5, expression was observed in the primitive
ridges (fig. 2F, G), and expression could be observed in
the notochord cells leaving the node (fig. 2G, green ar-
row). In Hensen’s node, stronger VMAT expression was
observed on the right side (fig. 2F, G, close-ups in fig. 2H,
I, section in fig. 2J), revealing VMAT as a new right-sided
asymmetric marker.

In situ hybridization revealed a similar profile for
cSERT; it was not detected before incubation (fig. 3A),
but became strongly expressed at the base of the primitive
streak (fig. 3B) and was detected throughout the streak
during its early elongation (fig. 3C, D). Interestingly, sec-
tioning (fig. 3E) revealed that unlike VMAT, which was
expressed throughout the mesoderm cells in the streak,
SERT was expressed in a punctate pattern in the ecto-
derm and mesoderm, indicating that only a subpopula-
tion of cells expressed SERT. At stages 4–5 (fig. 3F, G),
Hensen's node expressed SERT more strongly on the
right side; expression was detected in the primitive ridges
in the rostral two thirds of the streak. At stage 7+ (fig. 3H),
the neural folds expressed SERT (consistent with the ap-
pearance of serotonergic neurons) and the right-sided
asymmetry in Hensen's node became more pronounced
(compare fig. 3G, H, red vs. white arrowhead). Sectioning
(fig. 3I) revealed mesodermal expression, but only a weak
lateralization, consistent with a very narrow region of
asymmetry being present (fig. 3H). These expression data
confirm the existence of endogenous targets of fluoxetine
and reserpine in the chick embryo during the stages at
which exposure to these blockers randomize, reveal that
SERT and VMAT are expressed in the organizing center
of the chick embryo in which many LR patterning events
are occurring, and identify a novel right-sided asymmet-
ric marker. Taken together, our data strongly suggest that
SERT and VMAT are involved in early steps that pattern
the LR axis of frog and chick embryos.

[PAGE 9] Specific Inhibitors of SERT and VMAT Randomize
Asymmetry in Chick Embryos

In light of the expression data, we next tested the hy-
pothesis that SERT and/or VMAT function in chick em-
bryos [Mortensen et al., 2001; Larsen et al., 2004] was an
important endogenous component of LR patterning. The
data and statistical analyses are shown in table 7. Chick
embryos exposed to fluoxetine and reserpine between the
start of incubation and fixing at stage 4+ exhibited a sig-
nificant randomization of the expression of the early left-
sided marker Shh and the downstream marker Nodal
(compare fig. 4A to fig. 4B, and fig. 4D to fig. 4E). The
incidence of incorrect Shh sidedness was 36 and 38% for
SERT and VMAT, respectively, consistent with the mag-
nitude of laterality defects induced by SERT/VMAT in-
hibition in frog. These data (fig. 4C, F) support the neces-
sity for SERT and VMAT function upstream of the con-
sistent left-sided Shh expression, and suggest that SERT
and VMAT must function between stages 1 and 4.

[PAGE 9] Table 7. Effects of SERT and VMAT
inhibition on expression of asymmetric
genes in chick

Embryos were treated in ovo from just prior to incubation to stage 4+ with inhibitors
of SERT (fluoxetine) and VMAT (reserpine), and processed for in situ hybridization with
the left-sided genes Shh and Nodal. Inhibition of either SERT or VMAT effectively ran-
domizes the expression of both markers.


[PAGE 9] Discussion

Because the serotonin system includes machinery for
manufacturing serotonin (a source), 5-HT degradation (a
sink), and sensing of 5-HT levels (via receptors), this sys-
tem is an ideal candidate for a morphogen-like signal.
Indeed, the serotonergic synapse has been suggested to
have evolved from far more primitive signaling events

[PAGE 10] between embryonic blastomeres [Buznikov and Shmuk-
ler, 1981; Buznikov, 1984; Buznikov et al., 1996]. We
have recently demonstrated that in both chick and frog
embryos, serotonin exists long before the appearance of
neurons, and that 5-HT signaling through the R3 and R4
receptor subtypes is an obligate aspect of the patterning
of the LR axis [Fukumoto et al., 2005]. However, the pos-
sible role of serotonin transporters was not tested in that
study. Since both the availability of serotonin to intracel-
lular signaling mechanisms, and its concentration outside
of neighboring cells can be controlled by SERT and
VMAT function, any understanding of 5-HT signaling in
a patterning context will have to take into account the
possible involvement of transport.
... (rest of Discussion, Acknowledgements, and References from Extraction 2, as it is the most complete version)