Inaugural Issue
Mustafa B.A. Djamgoz, PhD¹ and Michael Levin, PhD²

WE ARE PLEASED and honored to launch our "inaugural
issue” as Bioelectricity enters its second volume, and
as it does, we thank again Dr. Dany Spencer Adams for
getting the journal going. We also thank all our contributors
and reviewers.

Bioelectricity is going from strength to strength! This is
our biggest ordinary issue to date with three perspectives and
four original research articles plus a revamped section on
"Bioelectricity Buzz,” highlighting some interesting articles
published elsewhere that our readers might also like to be
aware of. We hope that you will enjoy this varied section that
our Media Editor, Ann Rajnicek, has brilliantly put together.
You will notice that the Buzz includes neuroscience among
the highlighted topics and although we all know that there is
a plethora of neuroscience journals, we would like Bioelectricity also to be home for such articles.

It is our ultimate aim to make Bioelectricity a "one-stop"
peer-reviewed publication for keeping up with the most im-
portant developments and events in the field. As a start, as
you can see, the journal is now subtitled "Science, En-
gineering, and Medicine” to make it explicit that bioelec-
tricity as a discipline covers the whole spectrum and our
journal intends to cater for this scope. As a further step,
therefore, we have started reorganizing the editorial board and
are delighted to welcome Dr. Utkan Demirci, from Stanford
University School of Medicine, as a senior editor. Dr. Demirci,
an expert on microfluidics, works at the interface between
micro/nanoscale engineering and medicine. Further appoint-
ments and adjustments to the board will follow.

The next (June) issue of Bioelectricity will be a Special
Issue on "Electrically Charged Biomaterials for Drug De-
livery and Tissue Repair." We are very pleased that Drs.
Ambika Bajpayee and Mansoor Amiji at Northeastern Uni-
versity are guest editing this.

The journal welcomes submissions and ideas for future
special issues. We know the importance of fast reviewing
and publication, especially for young scientists. We are es-
pecially proud to report, therefore, that the average re-
view and publications times for Bioelectricity so far have
been 3.5 and 7 weeks, respectively. We are also happy to
note our prompt online publication. We shall do our utmost
to maintain these times.

With our very best wishes,


Mustafa B.A. Djamgoz, PhD
Co-Editor-in-Chief

Email: m.djamgoz@imperial.ac.uk

Michael Levin, PhD
Co-Editor-in-Chief

Email: michael.levin@tufts.edu


¹Department of Life Sciences, Imperial College London, London, United Kingdom.
²Allen Discovery Center, Tufts University, Medford, Massachusetts.