Morphoceuticals: Perspectives for
discovery of drugs targeting anatomical
control mechanisms in regenerative
medicine, cancer and aging

Léo Pio-Lopez¹, Michael Levin 1,2,
1 Allen Discovery Center, Tufts University, Medford, MA, USA
2 Wyss Institute for Biologically Inspired Engineering, Harvard University, Boston, MA 02115, USA

Morphoceuticals are a new class of interventions that target the setpoints of anatomical homeostasis
for efficient, modular control of growth and form. Here, we focus on a subclass: electroceuticals, which
specifically target the cellular bioelectrical interface. Cellular collectives in all tissues form bioelectrical
networks via ion channels and gap junctions that process morphogenetic information, controlling
gene expression and allowing cell networks to adaptively and dynamically control growth and pattern
formation. Recent progress in understanding this physiological control system, including predictive
computational models, suggests that targeting bioelectrical interfaces can control embryogenesis and
maintain shape against injury, senescence and tumorigenesis. We propose a roadmap for drug
discovery focused on manipulating endogenous bioelectric signaling for regenerative medicine, cancer
suppression and antiaging therapeutics.

Keywords: Biomedicine; Drug discovery; Morphogenesis

[PAGE 1] Introduction: Anatomical homeostasis - A central
concept for biomedicine

One crucial aspect of cell biology is the ability of groups of cells
to collectively reach specific, large-scale anatomical outcomes.
From single cells (eggs) to complex metazoan bodies, such cell
collectives cooperate toward creating complex forms and defending them against tumorigenesis, aging and injuries. Understanding the set of mechanisms that allow this is crucial for producing
innovating new therapeutics for birth defects, regenerative repair
and cancer. Transformative biomedical therapeutics would be
within reach if there were robust methods to communicate
anatomical goal states to cell groups, coaxing them to build fresh
organs and tissues as needed. What features of morphogenesis
can be exploited to achieve this?

Importantly, although reliable and consistent, morphogenesis
is not hardwired – it is plastic and dynamic (Figure 1). Cell collectives have ample resources to deal with a wide range of disruptors
of their morphogenetic target states: the same anatomical configuration can be reached from different starting conditions and
despite significant perturbations.¹ For example, regenerative
organisms, like salamanders, can regrow a limb after amputation.
The cells reproduce a normal limb and stop their activity when
the precisely correct appendage is complete, regardless of the
level of the original amputation. Deer regrow huge amounts of
antler bone and innervation each year, and even human beings can regenerate livers. Tadpoles with scrambled faces
still make normal frogs² because their craniofacial organs rearrange as needed during metamorphosis. This property is also
found in the regulative development of early mammalian
embryos that can recover from massive perturbation such as
complete (natural or artificial) bisection, producing two identical
normal bodies. Although cellular genetic hardware changes on
evolutionary timescales, its remarkable physiological and computational (software) properties enable cellular collectives to
form versatile machines that solve a wide range of problems in
real time. The emerging field at the intersection of diverse intelligence, computer science and developmental biophysics is
beginning to understand how cellular swarms deploy a kind of
collective intelligence to navigate the space of possible anatomical shapes (morphospace) until the correct target morphology is
reached, and despite perturbations. 3,4

[PAGE 2] 
How do such cellular collectives know when to stop growing
and remodeling? One set of models focuses on 'anatomical
homeostasis' – the competency to implement an error-
minimization scheme toward an anatomical setpoint. 4,5 This is
a different way of thinking about morphogenesis – not as a set
of outcomes that emerge inevitably from the unrolling of a fixed
genome through molecular interactions but instead as a real-time
problem-solving process carried out by a machine with context-
specific information-processing capabilities. This difference in
perspective is crucial because it has strong implications for therapeutic interventions. Most current approaches in molecular
medicine assume that the only viable therapeutic target is the
hardware. Biological circuits must be rewired bottom-up (e.g.,
via genomic editing or drugs that target specific protein activities). By contrast, the homeostatic perspective suggests that it
might be possible to work top-down, rewriting the anatomical
target or setpoint to induce a different outcome without changing the morphogenetic machinery itself. This corresponds to
the shift seen in information technology, which went from
exclusively hardware-based control (in the 1940s and 1950s) to
exploitation of reprogrammability, modularity of competent
subroutines and high-level programming languages. Can medicine benefit from a similar transition?

Morphoceuticals are a novel class of therapeutics inspired by
this perspective, developed to exploit the modular, error-
correcting capabilities of tissues instead of trying to micromanage pathways. These can be repurposed existing compounds or
newly discovered ones. What makes them unique is not a particular chemical property but rather the fact that they are used to
target high-level morphogenetic control machinery instead of
bottom-up targeting of specific molecular-level phenotypes.
Their discovery stems from efforts to understand collective
decision-making of cell groups navigating morphogenetic, transcriptional, physiological and metabolic problem spaces³; as
the computational mechanisms that assess and modify growth
and form are discovered, these sensing, memory and implementation steps become druggable targets.

Here, we focus on a subset of these: electroceuticals, which
specifically target bioelectric networks using ion channel drugs
and other modalities (Figure 2, Table 1). Electroceutical
approaches using direct external stimulation of peripheral nerves
have been covered elsewhere7-12; these have shown promise but
face the limitations where, although suitable to trigger action
potentials, electrodes are not able to set up the standing (stable)
patterns of cellular Vmem that are essential for organ-level bioelectric control. Here, we focus on drug approaches for manipulating
the native bioelectric interface (ion channels and gap junctions)

[PAGE 3] and especially expand its relevance beyond neurons to include
all body cells, complementing exciting recent advances in using
direct stimulation in regenerative contexts. 13-15 We review
recent work that explains why bioelectric networks are such a
compelling therapeutic target for developmental defects, regeneration and cancer. We also review evidence suggesting that
aging, which has not yet been explored in the literature on bioelectricity, 16-18 constitutes another instantiation of morphogenetic dysregulation that could also respond to targeting
bioelectric networks and offer our perspective on paths forward
for electroceutical drug discovery.

[PAGE 3] Developmental bioelectricity: A medium for
anatomical control

How do tissues store setpoints and coordinate cellular activity
across distance19? Mostly occurring in the brain, this is implemented by bioelectrical networks20 throughout the body. Developmental bioelectricity is the ubiquitous exchange of slowly
changing ion-based voltage signals within and among cells, 21
which underlies collective decision-making at the tissue level.
All cells respond to changes in transmembrane voltage potential
(Vmem). In this sense, other cells are similar to neurons: their electric state is determined by their ion channels, transporters and
pumps, and by gap junctions (electrical synapses), which propagate the electric state between neighboring cells (Figure 3a, b).
The bioelectric state of a cell is a function of past experience,
extracellular signaling and signals from immediate neighbors –
those directly connected via gap junctions. Bioelectric signaling
has been shown to regulate a range of phenotypes in human
cells, for example differentiation in mesenchymal stem cells. 22-25
More important than single cell states, however, is the fact
that, together, the voltage state of cells form a network – a
tissue-wide bioelectrical pattern that ultimately triggers the
changes in gene expression required to attain a specific morphogenetic goal. The bioelectric code maps prepatterns of voltage
into organ size, shape and placement information via transduction by a set of mechanisms including neurotransmitter gating,
calcium signaling and voltage-sensitive phosphatases (Figure 3).
Whereas the electrical neural networks of the brain guide muscles to implement behavioral goals, the ancient bioelectric networks of the body guide cell activity to implement
morphogenetic goals, via storage and implementation of slowly
changing anatomical prepatterns. 6,26-30

[PAGE 4] 
Spatiotemporal patterns of Vmem in vivo are instructive for
reaching specific morphogenetic outcomes. Microinjection of
mRNA encoding Kir6.2 ion channels into blastomeres of frog
embryos can reproduce the bioelectric state characteristic of the
native eye field in ectopic locations³¹ by mimicking the native
patterns that regionalize the face. 32,33 Doing this in precursors
of gut or other tissues – locations that never show competency
to become eye tissue when induced by the 'master' eye gene
Pax6 - induces the development of entire eyes that can connect
to the nervous system and provide vision. Similarly, regenerating
planaria, which normally reliably reproduce a head at one end
and a tail at the other, can be coaxed into viable two-head or
no-head forms by targeting the bioelectrical gradients in regenerating fragments, 34-36 or even to grow heads corresponding to
other species of planaria, 37 all without any genomic editing.
What these morphoceutical interventions have in common is
that, in all cases, the input stimulus is informationally very simple – it does not attempt to provide instructions to individual
cells on how to build an eye or a head, it provides a high-level
master regulator that says 'build organ X here' and relies on
the competency of the underlying cellular and molecular mechanisms to fill in the details. 1,3 This is a desirable property from
the perspective of regenerative medicine interventions: the less
we need to micromanage the more robust the outcomes. For
example, inducing a second head in this manner produces
well-scaled heads appropriate to the body, whereas induction
using a canonical molecular mechanism (Wnt pathway) induces
tiny heads because the size control has to be handled separately
when approaching the problem bottom-up.35

[PAGE 4] As befits a native control system, ion channels have been
implicated in numerous channelopathies of embryonic embryogenesis. 38-43 The human phenotypes are well-modeled by functional experiments in species like fruit fly, zebrafish, mouse and
frog, implicating numerous ion channels such as Kir2.1 and
gap junctions (connexins). 38,44–46

Overall, the manipulation of the bioelectrical pattern holds
great promise for the control of morphogenesis47 and, thus, for
regenerative medicine. Bioelectric interventions can work at several levels. For example, electrotaxis has been exploited for the
control of cell movement in wound healing. 48-53 At the level of
specific organs, malformations induced by mutations and teratogens can be reversed. For example, profound defects of brain
structure and function induced by teratogens can be reversed
by reinforcing normal endogenous voltage pre-patterns in xenopus.54 Pai et al. showed that brain developmental defects induced
by mutation of key neurogenesis genes such as Notch can be rescued by misexpression or activation of native HCN2
(hyperpolarization-activated cyclic nucleotide-gated) channels. 55,56 As voltage-regulated ion channels, HCN2 are context-
sensitive: they increase hyperpolarization of slightly polarized
cells but have no effect on depolarized cells. Thus, they function
as 'contrast enhancers' that sharpen weakened differences in
Vmem across compartment boundaries similar to the way a Sharpen filter works to emphasize order in a fuzzy image.
Pai et al. developed a computational model of the endogenous
bioelectrical circuit that sets the brain prepattern, modeling the
function of HCN2 channels to reinforce the voltage potential differences that demarcate the edges of the brain in development. 54


[PAGE 5] FIGURE 3
Mechanisms of developmental bioelectricity. (a) Movement of ions through ion channel proteins on all cell surfaces sets the Vmem (resting potential across the membrane). That Vmem can be communicated to the cell's neighbors via gap junctions (cyan arrows) - electric synapses. (b) The interactions of cell voltage transitions establish stable distributions of Vmem across tissues, such as shown here at one developmental timepoint of the frog embryo face, showing the future number and locations of eyes, mouth and other craniofacial organs. (c) Interventions designed to manipulate these gradients can target the native physiological computation machinery such as drug or light approaches to open or close ion channels and gap junctions, or move the neurotransmitter and other small molecular signals that propagate through these networks. Recent efforts have utilized computational models 58,174,175 to guide these techniques toward specific bioelectric patterning outcomes, which in turn regulate gene expression and cell movement to achieve organogenesis. Images a and c courtesy of Jeremy Guay of Peregrine Creative. Image b reproduced, with permission, from Ref. 32.

This model suggested that bioelectric drugs that mimic the effect of HCN2 overexpression should rescue brain teratogenesis via local and long-range bioelectric repair. Indeed, lamotrigine and gabapentin, already approved for use in humans for other indications, rescued teratogen-induced defects in xenopus embryos. 56-58 The ability to repair complex organ defects of the brain, face, heart and gut by simple (and systemic) application of a single, repurposed channel activator reveals the potential of this approach - it relies on the computational capacity of the tissues to do the heavy lifting, 4,19 using computation to identify simple triggers that do not require manual control of gene levels, localization, stem cell behavior, among others.
Above the organ level, bioelectric signaling has been shown to be a promising target to induce the regeneration of entire appendages. In rats, limb regeneration can be augmented by bioelectric signals. 14,59-62 In a frog model of tail regeneration (which includes muscle, spinal cord, blood vessels and skin), complete regrowth in nonregenerative conditions has been shown by the 1-hour application of a simple ionophore, which induces a pro-regenerative state in the wound and then does not need to be maintained during the 10 days of regeneration. 63 The rapid inductive aspect is also seen in non-bioelectric morphoceuticals, such as a bioreactor-delivered drug cocktail in adult frogs that triggered 18+ months of leg regeneration 64,65 after just 24 h of treatment.


[PAGE 6] Cancer as a developmental defect: New diagnostic and treatment modalities
One way to think about cancer is as the shrinking of the computational boundary from organ-sized back down to the level of a single cell, at which point cells resume their ancient unicellular past and treat the rest of the body as external environment.66-69 This model predicts that cancer would be driven by a dysregulation of the computational glue that normally keeps cells working toward organ-level morphogenetic goals, 70 for example bioelectric signaling.
It has been known for decades that tumors have depolarized bioelectric signatures and abnormal electrical connectivity compared with normal tissue, 71-74 in addition to excessive sodium accumulation.75-77 Moreover, tumorigenesis starts with the bioelectric disconnection of cells from the larger somatic morphogenetic network78,79; and metastatic melanoma can be induced in the absence of carcinogens or oncogenic mutations simply by dysregulating the bioelectric signaling between two cell types. 80,81 Indeed, some authors have described cancer as a special case of channelopathies: the onco-channelopathies. 82-89 It is important to keep in mind that, whereas abnormal bioelectric states can be induced by mutant ion channels, the dynamic nature of channel signaling (they can be opened or closed post-translationally) ensures that a plethora of physiological events can induce these states in the absence of any genetic lesions.90
Studies in model organisms support the diagnostic and therapeutic promise of targeting the tumor bioelectric state (Figure 4). In tadpoles, nascent tumors induced by microinjection of human oncogene mRNA are depolarized compared with normal tissue and can be detected in advance using voltage-sensitive fluorescent dyes,91 offering promise for early, noninvasive detection of cancer and for visualizing tumor boundaries during surgical intervention. Furthermore, co-injecting a hyperpolarizing ion channel greatly reduces tumor formation despite the overexpression of strong human oncogenes such as Xrel3 or KRAS. 91,92 Crucial for therapeutic potential, hyperpolarization can still produce cancer normalization when it occurs after tumors have formed, as well as at long-range, via a gap-junction-dependent mechanism. 93,94 This shows that hyperpolarization induced by pharmacological, genetic or even light-based stimuli could be used to prevent or revert tumors, and ion channels are beginning to be implicated in tumor resistance.95 Because of their essential role in controlling the spread of morphogenetic (or cancer-suppressive) signals throughout the body, gap junctions and connexins have also been proposed as therapeutic targets in cancer. 78,96,97 Importantly, this effect was seen to occur via a normalization of the cancer cells not by killing them (cytotoxicity).
Very recently, Mathews et al. showed that ion-channel drugs can suppress the cancer phenotype in glioblastoma cell lines.98 Because glioblastoma overgrowth and drug resistance are characterized by depolarized resting membrane potentials and an acidic extracellular pH in the inter-tumor environment, the authors sought to identify potential treatments by screening a panel of drugs that induce hyperpolarization and/or disrupt proton pumps. They screened varying concentrations of 47 compounds (and combinations thereof), most of which were modulators of ion channels, to identify treatments that suppress cancer phenotypes. The most effective treatments for reducing proliferation, inducing senescence and promoting differentiation in human U87 cells in vitro were the following combinations: NS1643 and pantoprazole; retigabine and pantoprazole; and pantoprazole or NS1643 with temozolomide. Because all of these are FDA-approved for other uses, drug repurposing could be a key factor in the development of electroceuticals as an alternative or adjunct to chemotherapy in treatment of glioblastoma and other cancers.

[PAGE 6] Aging as a morphostasis defect: Bioelectricity as a regulator of cellular and organismal aging
Maintaining order at the tissue level is a highly dynamic task; failures lead to cancer 67,99-101 and disorganization (such as that of the rosettes of the tongue surface when input via the lingual nerve is suppressed102). However, the most consistent and pervasive result of the failure of the body's constant regenerative efforts is aging.
Aging in humans is the progressive loss of function of biological processes with a decline of the capacity to maintain anatomical homeostasis and to reproduce, resulting in progressive organ malfunctions, diseases and ultimately death. The traditional conceptual biogerontological framework enunciates that aging is a process of damage accumulation caused by energy metabolism and mitochondrial function, and that cell proliferation and lifespan are limited by replicative senescence caused by telomere shortening. 103 Here, we propose aging as a morphostasis defect; specifically, we hypothesize that it is an ongoing developmental process with probable inputs from the ubiquitous bioelectrical control system that could link the seven pillars of aging104 (Figure 5a). Next, we discuss some of the potential links between aging, aging-related diseases and bioelectricity, and the opportunities these create for biomedical research.


[PAGE 7] The links between aging, aging-related diseases and bioelectricity via ion channels are starting to be discovered. 105-107 Rates of cellular or organismal aging have been shown to be regulated by ion channels. In a few cases, specific types of ion channels and downstream transducers have been associated with aging. The seven pillars of aging can be linked directly or indirectly to bioelectricity. 104 Indeed, ion channels have been associated with metabolism and inflammation during aging. 106 Stem cells and regeneration are controlled by developmental bioelectricity. 17 Epigenetic alterations have been linked to changes in the bioelectrical pattern during tadpole regeneration. 108 Proteostasis is regulated by lysosomal function that is regulated by ion channels. 107 Several stress-regulated ion channels exist 109,110 and macromolecular damage affects ion channels111 and can impair the bioelectrical pattern responsible for the maintenance of the anatomy. More specifically, ion channels and transporters influence aging and longevity via the regulation of membrane excitability, Ca2+ homeostasis, mitochondrial and endolysosomal function, and the transduction of sensory stimuli. 107 Ion channels are also implicated in aging-related diseases impacting the heart, brain, cancer and the eye105 and in aging-related inflammation via mitochondrial functions. 106 Channelopathies are also often associated with organ failure during aging. 112.
Aging-dependent deterioration of neuronal activity has been linked to changes in Ca²+ homeostasis. 113,114 In age-related cardiovascular diseases, Toro et al. observed NO release associated with a reduction in the density of the BKCa alpha subunit in coronary smooth muscle, 115 indicating decreased expression during aging. Sinoatrial node (SAN) dysfunction can also be related to changes in the activity of several ion channels that control appropriate directionalities of ionic fluxes in the SAN and cardiac muscle. 105 In addition, studies showed a link between Hutchinson-Gilford progeria syndrome (HGPS) and bioelectricity. An alteration of post-translational modification of progerin that contributes to the phenotype of premature aging in HGPS patients could be caused by an abnormal cytosolic Ca2+ concentration owing to upregulation of the transient receptor potential vanilloid type 2 (TRPV2) calcium channel. 116,117
Rejuvenation strategies including blood factors, metabolic manipulations, senolytics and cellular reprogramming have been developed recently to delay and potentially reverse the aging process. 118 Several of these approaches appear to have an impact on bioelectricity and regulate the behavior of ion channels. Metformin acts on nutrient-sensing pathways involved in the rejuvenation effects of dietary regimens 118 and has several effects on bioelectricity. It restores electrophysiology of small conductance calcium-activated potassium channels in the atrium of GK diabetic rats119 and normalizes the aberrant intracellular Ca2+ clearing induced by high glucose in adult rat myocytes. 120 Blood factors can have a pro-rejuvenation effect as shown by the positive impact of young blood on the liver, muscle and brain. 121 Wnt signaling underlying the differentiation bias of aged muscle stem cell is reversed by young blood factors. 122 Wnt signaling influences ion channels and is aberrantly activated in several human diseases including cancer. 123 For example, inhibition of the Wnt signaling pathway downregulates Cav1.2 in aging models characterized by an altered osteogenic differentiation. 124 More globally, Wnt signaling can be modulated by variation in K+ and Ca²+ fluxes across cell membrane induced by changes in transmembrane potential. 125

[PAGE 8] Besides mechanistically testing the links between ion channel dysfunction and specific aging processes, it will be essential to determine what happens to the bioelectric prepatterns during aging. What about the bioelectric states that go awry toward the end of the healthspan? Do the bioelectric cues get weaker or are the cues there but the cellular ability to perceive them (and act on them) wanes? In particular, in addition to life extension assays in canonical model systems (mice), it will be essential to understand what happens in apparently immortal species like planaria. It is tempting to hypothesize that their lack of aging, cancer resistance and incredible regenerative capacity all stem from the same thing: remarkably strong tissue-level morphogenetic control mechanisms, which are known to involve bioelectric pattern control. 126.


[PAGE 8] Concluding remarks and future perspectives: A roadmap for morphoceutical discovery and opportunities
Rational control of bioelectrical states has immense potential for biomedical applications in regeneration, cancer and aging. Several key attributes make bioelectric states an especially attractive target for drug discovery for regeneration, cancer, aging and, indeed, for any disease that can be seen as a defect or dysregulation of morphogenesis. 15,18,27,127 First, many studies demonstrate that bioelectric states constitute a 'master signal', they can control morphogenetic cascades and avoid the need to micromanage extremely complex spatiotemporal biochemical interactions via genetic engineering or classical molecular biology. Instead, accurate generation or regeneration of specific parts can be induced by the simple imposition of specific voltage patterns, as shown for planarian heads, 128 eyes31 or frog tails, 63 as described above.
Second, bioelectric signaling seems to require only a brief, transient trigger stimulus. For example, in rat mesenchymal cells in vitro, a brief electrical stimulus induces long-lasting osteogenic effects, suggesting it could provide powerful synergy with bone-tissue-engineering therapies. 129 Similarly, manipulation of bioelectrical states for just 1-3 h triggers an 8- or 10-day program of regeneration for planarian heads and tadpole tails, respectively. 35,63
Third, ion-channel-targeting drugs are the third-best-selling group of prescribed drugs worldwide, 130 providing a large pool of candidates that can be screened for repurposing as electroceuticals. In addition, only a small percentage of the 400 annotated ion-channel genes predicted in the human genome have been targeted, so there are many novel targets for drug discovery as well.

The ideal way to control this native interface is via channel-, pump- and gap-junction-targeting compounds (although light, vibration and other exotic modalities might someday augment this technology). Repurposing of drugs that are already FDA-approved could be particularly expedient for discovery of morphoceuticals. Despite the large number of channel drugs that are already known and tested, this is only a small percentage of ion channels that have been targeted for drug development. 130 Beyond drug repurposing, the in silico results on the opening and closing of ion channels will also suggest the design of new compounds using traditional drug design methods, to fill out the massive space of possible electroceuticals.

This effort will require the development of tools that trawl transcriptomic databases (such as EDEn) revealing which ion channels are potential targets for intervention in a specific tissue131 (Figure 5b). Computational modeling will also be key to simulating bioelectrical dynamics to predict the bioelectrical pattern resulting from opening or closing specific targeted channels with existing drugs. In silico results will predict the effects of specific drugs targeting tissue-specific ion channels, suggesting specific in vivo experiments to assess their potential for regeneration, repair or cancer normalization.

For a specific purpose, the software will make suggestions regarding which channels to target, and in what way (temporal profile, and which drugs) to obtain the targeted bioelectrical pattern within a tissue. A key ingredient to this workflow however is the development of physiomic datasets across patients, ages, body regions and health or disease states. When the physiomic data catch up in volume to the deluge of transcriptional, genetic, epigenetic and metabolic datasets that are now available, the next generation of bioelectric interventions will be immediately within reach (especially given the availability of machine learning and data mining tools).

One aspect of this strategy is key. The goal is not to simply find drugs that up- or down-regulate specific channels in the same way one would address over- or under-expressed transcription factors. It is, for example, already known that ion-channel drugs are very promising cancer drugs. 132-138 However, the real promise of this technology will only be realized when they are seen not as rewiring agents mechanically targeting specific gene products or even pathways but as signals (like a keypad depression on a computer interface) designed to manipulate the bioelectrically mediated decision-making of cell networks. This requires a different class of computational models that treats the underlying tissue as a computational agent, not a simple dynamical system. 1,139-141 This in turn suggests the urgency of development (and integration into molecular-biological and physiological models) of computational frameworks, such as causal information theory, that seek to decode the information flow between cells during health and disease 75,141-143 or integrative network representation for drug discovery 144,145 including the transcriptional representation of the electrome using EDEn for example. 131

A second aspect is the non-locality of bioelectric information. 146 As in the brain, several disease states receive input from distant locations. For example, embryonic brain structure can be damaged and repaired by bioelectric states occurring on the other side of the animal. 147,148 The same is true for tumorigenesis149,150 and the amputation status of one limb can be read out from the bioelectric signals of the contralateral (untouched) limb. 151 This suggests the possibility of surrogate site diagnostics and treatment, and makes it imperative that bioelectric models and drug searches do not focus on the local site of a wound or defect but consider the entire organism as a potential interface for treatment. For example, in the case of tail regeneration 63 and hyperinnervation to improve vision, 152 the entire animal was exposed but only relevant cells responded (i.e., no need for spatially specific stimulation). In other cases, local delivery via a wearable bioreactor was used. 64,65

More broadly, beyond electroceuticals, what binds biochemical, biomechanical, optical and bioelectrical morphoceuticals together is the commitment to exploiting high-level problem-solving capacities in cells and tissues. For example, other physiological parameters such as REDOX state 153,154 or tissue biomechanics 155,156 can likewise serve as master controls for complex outcomes. But whether induced by CRISPR, optogenetic stimulation, pharmacological agents or even behavioral cues, 157,158 the crucial aspect is to move from managing micro-level components to the cybernetic properties of entire circuits. 159–161

One implication of top-down control of modules and the allostatic capabilities of living matter11,162 is that dosage and timing might not have to be micromanaged. For example, in recent examples of triggering the regeneration of complex organs and appendages via bioelectric, 35 hormonal65 and other biochemical means, 64 the organ type, composition, shape and size were all induced without any attempts to identify an effective dose or precise timing regime. A key part of this strategy is offloading the complexity onto the organism itself (exploiting its modular, regulative control structure) to achieve complex outcomes where precise parameters and molecular details are not yet known. Morphoceuticals can be rationally designed based on top-down control mechanisms4,19 or discovered in pharmacological30,163,164 or genetic 44,46 screens specifically focused on high-level control phenotypes.

Taken together, a picture emerges in which the regenerative medicine of the future can stand on the shoulders of two giants: computer science and cognitive/behavioral science. Computational neuroscience progress reveals how a multiscale approach to the brain (not only molecular but circuit, network and even psychology-level) is providing a full-stack understanding of the control of behavior. We suggest that the same strategy can be applied in regenerative medicine, by targeting bioelectricity as the computational glue that binds cells together to common purpose in vivo, and embracing the idea that causally effective interventions can be applied at levels higher than that of molecules. 6,141,165,166 Definitive approaches to aging, cancer, traumatic injury and birth defects await, limited only by our ability to see tissues as competent information-processing agents that we now have the tools to meet at their own level.


[PAGE 10] Data availability

No data was used for the research described in the article.

[PAGE 10] Acknowledgments

We gratefully acknowledge funding from Templeton World
Charity Foundation (TWCF0606), the Guy Foundation and the
John Templeton Foundation (62212).

[PAGE 10] Conflicts of interest

M.L. is a co-founder of Morphoceuticals Inc., a company seeking
to develop bioelectric approaches to regeneration.

170. Dolk H et al.. Lamotrigine use in pregnancy and risk of orofacial cleft and other congenital anomalies. Neurology. 2016;86:1716-1725.
171. Lin G et al.. Imparting regenerative capacity to limbs by progenitor cell transplantation. Dev Cell. 2013;24:41-51.
172. Fukumoto T et al.. Serotonin transporter function is an early step in left-right patterning in chick and frog embryos. Dev Neurosci. 2005;27:349-363.
173. Frey E et al.. TRPV1 Agonist, Capsaicin, Induces Axon Outgrowth after Injury via Ca(2+)/PKA Signaling. eNeuro. 2018;5.
174. Cervera J et al.. From non-excitable single-cell to multicellular bioelectrical states supported by ion channels and gap junction proteins: Electrical potentials as distributed controllers. Prog Biophys Mol Biol. 2019;149:39-53.
175. Cervera J et al.. Bioelectrical coupling in multicellular domains regulated by gap junctions: A conceptual approach. Bioelectrochemistry. 2018;123:45-61.
176. Pai VP et al.. HCN2 Rescues brain defects by enforcing endogenous voltage pre-patterns. Nat Commun. 2018;9:998.