Two Molecular Models of Initial Left-Right Asymmetry Generation
Michael Levin¹, Ph.D. and Nanette Nascone, M.S.
Cell Biology dept.
Harvard Medical School
200 Longwood Ave.
Boston, MA 02115
1 Author for correspondence:
(617) 599-3231
fax: (617) 432-7758
email: mlevin@husc.harvard.edu
keywords: embryo, morphogenesis, axis, left-right, asymmetry, connexin-43,
dynein, laterality

[PAGE 2] Summary
Left-Right (LR) asymmetry is a fascinating problem in embryonic
morphogenesis. Recently, a pathway of genes has been identified which is in-
volved in LR patterning in vertebrates (1,2). Although, this work characterizes the
interactions of several asymmetrically-expressed genes, it is still entirely unclear
how such asymmetric expression is set up in the first place. There are two promis-
ing molecular candidates which may play a role in such a process: the motor pro-
tein dynein, and the gap junction protein connexin-43 (Cx43). We present two
models, significantly supported by previous findings, which hypothesize that (1)
dynein asymmetrically localizes LR determinants in individual cells to establish
cell-autonomous LR biasing, and (2) asymmetric activity of Cx43 gap junctions
within key cells sets up electric potentials in multi-cellular fields, thus establish-
ing large-scale LR asymmetry.

[PAGE 3] Introduction
Symmetry in morphogenesis
Animal body plans occur in a wide variety of symmetries: spherical (volvox),
radial (starfish), chiral (snails, ciliates), bilateral (drosophila) and pseudo-bilateral
(man). Most vertebrates have a generally bilaterally-symmetrical body plan, but
this symmetry is broken further into a pseudo-symmetry by the consistently asym-
metric placement of various internal organs such as the heart, liver, spleen, and
gut, or an asymmetric development of paired organs (such as brain hemispheres
or lungs).
Symmetries are often broken in development. For example, the radial symme-
try of the early chick blastoderm is broken into a bilateral symmetry by the ap-
pearance of Köhler's sickle and then the primitive streak (3). This is further bro-
ken into a pseudo-symmetry by the right-sided looping of the heart tube. In
contrast, the early sea-urchin larva has bilateral (and then, pseudo-bilateral) sym-
metry. The adult, however, has a five-fold radial symmetry. Such axial patterning
is the most fundamental process in embryogenesis because it lays a foundation
and provides a context for all subsequent morphogenetic events.
Left-Right Asymmetry
Asymmetry along the left-right (LR) axis (defined as an invariant, among nor-
mal individuals, difference between the left and right sides of an animal's mor-
phology) is fundamentally different from asymmetries in the other two axes. First,
there is no feature of the macroscopic world which differentiates right from left.
While gravity is a ubiquitous feature of the world which can be used to define the
dorso-ventral axis, and any chosen direction of motion automatically picks out an
anterior end (since that is the end which is best used for sensory and processing
organs), there is no independent way to pick out the left (or right) direction.

[PAGE 4] 
Second, all normal members of a given species are asymmetrical in the same
direction. However, animals with complete mirror reversal of internal organs are
otherwise phenotypically unimpaired (4,5). Thus, while it is possible to come up
with plausible evolutionary reasons for why organisms might be asymmetric in
the first place (optimal packing of viscera, etc.), there is no obvious reason for
why they should all be asymmetric to the same direction. It is, after all, easier to
imagine a developmental mechanism for generating bilateral asymmetry (such as
positive-feedback and amplification of stochastic biochemical differences) than
for biasing it to a given direction. The left-right axis is thus unique, and especially
interesting, among the three axes.
Many kinds of situs anomalies have been reported in the human teratology
literature, associated with such syndromes as Kartagener's and Ivemark's (5).
These include dextrocardia, situs inversus (a complete mirror-image reversal of
the sidedness of asymmetrically positioned organs and asymmetric paired organs),
heterotaxia (where each organ makes an independent decision as to its situs), and
right or left isomerism (where the organism is completely symmetrical, leading to
polysplenia or asplenia). Of these, only the complete (and rare) situs inversus is
not associated with physiological difficulties. The rest, especially heterotaxia,
often result in serious health problems for the patient. Laterality defects can arise
in a single individual but are especially associated with twinning (4, 6, 7). These
syndromes are paralleled to various degrees by mouse mutants such as: iv (8)
which results in roughly 50% of the offspring being phenotypically situs inversus,
and inv (9) which have 100% of the offspring showing mirror image inversions of
the internal organs.
The molecular mechanisms underlying antero-posterior and dorso-ventral
asymmetry have been studied in detail (10). However, the basis for LR asymme-
try is much less well understood. Neville (11) presents an extensive and fascinat-
ing survey of various asymmetries, including the well-known asymmetric organs
such as the heart, as well as flatfish which consistently settle on and undergo eye

[PAGE 5] 
migration to one side, and even a species of parasite (the arthropod Bopyrus)
which lives only on one side of prawn and shrimp. There has been little informa-
tion, however, shedding light on the mechanisms which determine the sidedness
of such asymmetries. Previously, information on the molecular basis of LR asym-
metry centered around three lines of inquiry: the genetics of chirality in snails, a
list of drugs which cause alterations in LR patterning, and several mammalian
mutants which have phenotypes associated with LR asymmetry. Recently, a path-
way of genes has been described which are asymmetrically expressed in the chick
embryo and control the situs of the heart and other organs (1, 12).

The initial steps of LR determination remain unknown

LR patterning can be conceptually divided into three phases: (1) cell(s) in the
very early embryo must ascertain their own right vs. left sides, presumably by a
model like that involving a tethered chiral molecule (13), and (through lineage re-
lationships, migration, and cell-cell inductive interactions) this cell-autonomous
LR information is converted into asymmetrical multi-cellular domains of expres-
sion; (2) these asymmetrically-expressed genes regulate each other in sequential
(and perhaps branched) pathways to establish and maintain asymmetric gene ex-
pression domains; and finally, (3) the various organ primordia read this informa-
tion and determine their situs.

With the identification of a cascade of asymmetrically expressed genes which
regulate each others' expression (1), a significant part of phase 2 has been uncov-
ered. Likewise, it has become clear that this pathway controls the LR patterning
of many aspects of laterality (12), and experiments are currently under-way to de-
termine the mechanisms by which organs such as the heart respond to this infor-
mation (Sylvia Pagan, personal communication). Thus, significant progress is on
the horizon for phase 3. However, what is conspicuously missing are clues to the
most interesting part of this problem: how the LR axis is oriented with respect to
the AP and DV axes in the first place, and how this orientation at the single-cell
level is converted into asymmetry on the scale of the whole embryonic field.

The existence of isomerisms (where the body is symmetrical, consisting of
either two normally-left sides or conversely, two right sides) and randomized
asymmetry (i.e., 50% incidence of complete situs inversus) as two distinct genetic
conditions suggests that normal LR asymmetry is accomplished in two dissociable
steps: a random asymmetry is generated, which is then biased in the correct direc-
tion with respect to the other two axes (13). The pathway identified by Levin et
al. most likely directs the second step, since right-sided misexpression of left-
determining genes such as Shh or nodal results in heterotaxia (1,12), not true
isomerism. Thus, there is still no molecular data on how (random) asymmetry is
generated in the first place.

We would like to sketch out some ideas regarding two of the only promising
molecular candidates for the primary steps in LR patterning, dynein and
connexin-43. While the models described in this paper are quite speculative, they
illustrate the types of mechanisms which are very likely to play a role in these
early events. The dynein model is designed to show how a chiral molecule could
differentiate L from R within a single cell. The Cx43 model shows how, once a
cell becomes LR asymmetric, this information could become transduced into
multi-cellular domains of asymmetric gene expression. It should be noted that the
two models are independent of each other and describe complementary phases in
LR patterning.


[PAGE 5] A Specific chiral molecule model

Microtubule motors

The first model, based on the ideas of Brown and Wolpert (13), hypothesizes a
cytoskeletal component, such as a centriole, which is chiral. It is oriented with re-
spect to the AP and DV axes of the egg by means of other cytoskeletal filaments,
and serves as a nucleation center for filaments or microtubules which run along
the LR axis. Consistent with this model, tubulin was identified as one of the pro-
teins modified in iv homozygotes relative to w.t. mice (14). The head-tail attrac-
tive feature of microtubule assembly (15) ensures that the chiral nature of the nu-
cleating center is passed on as a directionality of the LR tracks. Interestingly, the
mouse egg has no centriole (one forms anew after several cell divisions), so that
defects in the origin of chirality would show up as zygotic (as in the mouse LR
mutants, such as iv); in contrast, the maternal mode of inheritance of chirality in
snails (16) may be explained by the fact that the snail egg's cytoskeletal compo-
nents are formed by the mother.

The next step results in a microtubule motor, such as dynein, riding the LR
tracks carrying mRNA or protein determinants, which become transported to one
side of the cell. These determinants could become localized with cell division
(which is possible in molluscs or even frogs), or this process could happen anew
in each cell during various phases (which is most likely in the chick and mouse)
followed by the kind of process discussed below for generating domains of LR
gene expression.

[PAGE 6] Evidence for a Dynein model

An excellent candidate for such a mechanism is dynein (17), a motor protein
which serves to actively translocate sub-cellular cargo (18-20). There appear to be
at least 13 axonemal (used in cilia and flagella), and 2 cytoplasmic (presumably
involved in axonal transport, mitosis, etc.) dynein genes (reviewed in (21)).

Despite the involvement of dynein proteins in many disparate events (such as
ciliary function, vesicle transport in axons, mitosis, etc.), it is clear that certain
dynein genes have very specific expression. For example, Dhc64c is expressed
only in ovaries, testes, and very early embryos in Drosophila; furthermore
Dhc64c is asymmetrically (though not LR) localized in the Drosophila oocyte
(22-23). Thus, it may be expected that specific lesions in one of the many dynein
genes can affect LR patterning without lethal effects on mitosis or organelle trans-
port. There is compelling evidence that early AP and DV embryonic patterning is
controlled in part by the cytoskeleton (24-25), and most importantly, disruption of
the microtubule array in Xenopus by UV light causes 25% situs inversus (26).

[PAGE 7] Predictions of this model

Under this model, the heterotaxia phenotype could result from a broken dynein
motor which is unable to perform localization of determinants. This would allow
the factor to homogeneously accumulate in both halves of a cell, resulting in
double-R or double-L (depending on the nature of the determinant) compart-
ments. As shown by Levin et al. (12), this leads to independent randomization of
organ situs. Interestingly, human patients with heterotaxia as part of Kartagener's
syndrome do show defects in dynein (27-29).

The inv mutant could result from a nucleation center that is either the opposite
enantiomer of one with the proper chirality, or simply becomes oriented incor-
rectly. The former possibility is much less likely (since the complete reversal of
such a complex structure would require several coordinated mutations); it is most
likely that whatever binding site is used to tether it with respect to the DV and AP
axes is altered. This would result in embryos which are normal except for the con-
sistently incorrect situs (as is observed in inv mice, where nodal is expressed al-
ways on the incorrect side only (2)).

The iv mutant may represent a nucleation structure that was not tethered at all.
Thus, it would face in different directions (randomly) in different cells. Depend-
ing on stochastic events, this would result in a mosaic of domains of cells which
were oriented properly, adjacent to cells which were not. This would be magnified
by cell proliferation and lineage relationships and could thus easily account for the
full spectrum of nodal expression patterns observed in the mutant mice (2), corre-
sponding to normal situs, reversed situs, or double L or R sides.


[PAGE 8] An alternative explanation for why dynein defects are associated with laterality
disturbances has been proposed: that cilia directly influence the situs of the gut
(27-30). This is unlikely because it has been shown that several kind of asymme-
tries are present long before gut looping (1), and because some patients with
heterotaxia do have normal cilia function (31-32). This may be a consequence of
the fact that only cytoplasmic, not ciliary, dynein is important for this process.

[PAGE 8] Future directions

Several approaches can be taken to test the dynein model. Determining the ex-
pression of the various dynein genes in early embryos is crucial, to guide
misexpression experiments and to begin to address the question of how a defect in
a basic cell function protein can have such a subtle phenotype. The question of
whether cytoplasmic dynein or ciliary function is important for LR patterning can
be addressed by specifically disabling cilia motion, by mechanisms such as Ni++
(33), halothane (34), or vanadate (35), which inhibits cilia but not organelle mo-
tion. Finally, a direct test of the model can be made by overexpressing in Xenopus
dominant negative versions of the appropriate dynein, consisting of the
endogenous dynein cargo binding-domain alone, or fused to a kinesin motor do-
main (which moves in a direction opposite to that of dynein (36)). The resulting
animals may be expected to exhibit LR phenotypes as the dominant negative
dynein mis-localizes LR determinants.

[PAGE 8] How cell-autonomous LR information is transduced into cell fields

A condition known as isomerism is occasionally observed in human patients
(5). This condition, sometimes called Ivemark syndrome, where the organism is
bilaterally symmetric (polysplenia when two left sides are present, or asplenia
when both are right sides (37)) is especially interesting because the known LR
pathway provides no obvious clues as to how this might happen. For example, as
shown by the Shh misexpression studies (12), producing bilateral nodal expres-
sion does not result in two morphologically identical left sides, but rather causes a
heterotaxic phenotype where each organ decides its situs randomly. Isomerism is
likely to shed clues on a mechanism quite different from that in which the genes
and mutants discussed above are involved: the generation of LR asymmetry, as
opposed to its biasing in an appropriate direction.

The relevance of Cx43
Connexin-43 (Cx43) is a member of a family of at least 12 distinct genes,
whose proteins make up the intercellular channels of gap junctions (reviewed in
(38)). These channels are composed of hexamers of connexins and provide con-
duits for the transfer of ions and other small molecules (such as 2nd messengers)
between cells. Gap junctions have been implicated in normal embryonic develop-
ment (39-40) as well as in tumor growth (41-42), since reduced communication
between cells stimulates tumor promotion.
Most interestingly, it was found that human patients with isomerisms exhibit
mutations in Cx43 (43). This suggests the exciting possibility that gap junctions
also play a role in LR patterning. This is also suggested by the observation that
LR asymmetric transfer of dye takes place between blastomeres in the early em-
bryo (44-45, Fig. 1A), consistent with gap junctions' providing an asymmetric
partitioning of LR determinants. Moreover, transgenic mice that overproduce
Cx43 have situs anomalies (C. W. Lo, personal communication). Finally, expres-
sion of cx43.4 is missing in zebrafish ntl mutant embryos (46). Ntl embryos lack
an organized notochord and have randomized heart situs (47). Although this has
been attributed to an active role of notochord in LR compartmentalization, it is
equally possible that cx43.4 is needed earlier for LR patterning. Gap junctions
could potentially be involved in LR asymmetry by either providing an asymmetric
path for the localization or distribution of a LR morphogen, or by generating an
electric field which produces asymmetrical localization of charged molecules by
electrophoresis.

The Cx43 model
The idea that endogenous electric fields specify large-scale embryonic pattern
is quite old (48-51); this has been suggested to involve galvanotaxic control of
cell migration, electrophoresis of morphogens, electromagnetic cell-cell signaling,
etc. The distribution of communication channels shown in Fig. 1B (45) suggests a
model for LR asymmetry generation by gap junctions: that cells A and/or H are a
battery, which generates a potential difference (due to asymmetric placement of
ion pumps on the cell surface, established by a dynein-like mechanism). Since the
other cells appear to be connected to each other by gap junctions, they represent
an open circuit with respect to the current generated by the cells at A. Thus,
charged LR determinants molecules would experience a net electromotive force
and would tend to electrophorese to different halves of the embryo. A similar
electrophoretic mechanism for directing the movement of maternal components
has been characterized in egg-ovary systems (52-54); likewise, endogenous elec-
tric fields have also been shown to be involved in symmetry breaking in the Fucus
embryo (55). The finding that placement of amphibian embryos in applied electric
fields results in reversals of LR asymmetry (56) is also consistent with this model,
which represents one possibility by which asymmetry at the level of the cell be-
comes transformed into asymmetric fields of gene expression.
The Cx43 knock-out mouse (57) does not recapitulate exactly the human phe-
notype associated with the Cx43 mutations (43): while a heart defect is observed,
it is not a true situs abnormality but a problem with heart morphogenesis per se.
This suggests that instead of simply a lack of Cx43 gap junctions, a more subtle
mutation in Cx43 is responsible for isomerism (and specifically, that the w.t.
asymmetry is not purely a result of open channels, but rather may be based on a
specific pattern of cell communication restrictions). Britz-Cunningham et al. (43)
find that 5 out of 6 of the (unrelated) patients had Ser364 mutated to a Pro, and
suggest that this may interfere with serine phosphorylation which is known to af-
fect Cx43 function (58).


[PAGE 11] Future Experiments
Several directions need to be followed to elucidate the role of Cx43 in LR
asymmetry. First, detailed expression patterns of various connexins (not just 43)
in frogs and mice need to be ascertained. Second, mutants such as the Cx43-/-
transgenic (57) and the Cx43 overexpression transgenic (mentioned in (43) as
having randomized turning and heart looping) need to be examined for nodal ex-
pression (59). Third, whether or not the Ser364Pro mutation found in the human
isomerism patients is directly responsible for their phenotype should be tested by
producing a knock-in transgenic mouse (replacing the mouse's endogenous Cx43
sequence with the Ser364Pro mutant); besides answering that question, the result-
ing mice may turn out to be a good medical model for human laterality defects
and their treatment. Fourth, since it is unclear whether LR asymmetry may arise
from the restriction of some morphogens due to closed gap junction channels be-
tween particular cells, or conversely, from specific cell-cell signaling resulting
from open gap junctions, the exact nature of communication needed for correct
asymmetry needs to be determined by functional studies. Finally, our model of
electrophoretically-based asymmetry can be directly tested by short-circuiting this
proposed current, as recently done by Hotary and Robinson (60). We are currently
pursuing several of these approaches.

[PAGE 11] Conclusion
An understanding of these processes would have important implications for
research in embryonic development, both in terms of basic questions of LR asym-
metry, as well as a better appreciation of the role of endogenous electric fields
(51,61-64) and the cytoskeleton in embryonic morphogenesis. The models de-
scribed here represent specific, testable hypotheses which can serve to guide ex-
periments directed toward that end.

1. Levin M, Johnson R, Stern C, Kuehn M, Tabin C. A molecular pathway deter-
mining left-right asymmetry in chick embryogenesis. Cell 1995; 82: 1-20
2. Lowe L, Supp DM, Sampath K, Yokoyama T, Wright CVE, Potter and SS,
Overbeek P, Kuehn MR. Conserved left-right asymmetry of nodal expression and
alterations in murine situs inversus. Nature 1996; 381: 158-161
3. Eyal-Giladi H, Kochav S. From cleavage to primitive streak formation, Dev
Biol 1976; 49: 321-337
4. Burn J. Disturbance of morphological laterality in humans. Ciba Foundation
Symposium 1991; 162: 282-96
5. Winer-Muram HT. Adult presentation of heterotaxic syndromes and related
complexes. J Thoracic Imaging 1995; 10: 43-57
6. Levin M, Pagan S, Roberts DJ, Holmes LB, Kuehn M, Tabin C. Left/Right-
Determining Signals and Symmetry Reversal in Twins. Nature 1996, in press
7. Nascone N, Mercola M. Spemann's organizer can specify left-right asymmetry.
(1996), in press
8. Hummel KP, Chapman DB. Visceral inversion and associated anomalies in the
mouse. J Heredity 1959; 50: 9-23
9. Yokoyama T, Copeland NG, Jenkins NA, Montgomery CA, Elder FF, and
Overbeek PA. Reversal of left-right asymmetry: a situs inversus mutation. Sci-
ence 1993; 260: 679-682
10. Hunt P, Krumlauf R. Hox codes and positional specification in vertebrate em-
bryonic axes. Ann Rev Cell Biol 1992; 8: 227-256
11. Neville AC. Animal asymmetry. London: Edward Arnold, 1976
12. Levin M, Roberts DJ, Holmes LB, Tabin C. Activin and Nodal determine the
situs of asymmetric organs independently. Development 1996; submitted
13. Brown N., Wolpert L. The development of handedness in left/right asymme-
try. Development 1990; 109: 1-9
.....(rest of references as in Extraction 1, since it has the complete list)