Bioelectrical signaling has rich history

The report on bioelectrical signaling
work done by Michael Levin and
colleagues (PHYSICS TODAY, March
2013, page 16) omits the fact that better
results were obtained many years ago.
R. O. Becker considered axial electric
signals in light of the ability of salaman-
ders to regenerate limbs.¹ With A. A.
Marino, he used biological effects of
electrical signals² to stimulate the re-
growth of portions of amputated limbs
in rats; Becker also demonstrated that
those limbs usually do not regenerate;⁴
and he and others showed that cartilage
and bone are electrically active.⁵


Levin responds: Roderic Lakes adds
an important point; the modern work on
bioelectricity was indeed inspired by
that of earlier researchers in the field,
including not only Robert Becker and
Andrew Marino but also Elmer Lund,
Harold Burr, Lionel Jaffe, Harold Beams,
and many others. However, the results
discussed in Johanna Miller's story are
very different from prior work in several
ways; for brevity, I mention just a few.
First, the signaling revealed by the
recent research is contained in the spa-
tial distribution of cell membranes' rest-
ing potential (Vmem) across tissues—
very different from the extracellular
electric fields and ion currents studied
by prior workers.
Second, this work merges the control
of shape in vivo by bioelectric gradients
with molecular biology techniques. For
the first time, we know the proteins that
create and control the gradients, and we
know the exact molecular steps that
convert those physical events to down-
stream genetic targets. The field has ad-
vanced over earlier work by mechanis-
tically linking physiological changes to
the crucial molecular-genetic pathways
that they control; in Becker's work, the
molecular mechanisms that enable elec-
tric fields to control regeneration were
a complete mystery.
Third, while work with applied elec-
tric fields had shown impressive ability
to turn on a regenerative response, the
recent results are the first demonstra-
tion of reprogramming tissues into en-
tirely different organs. The remarkable
ability of Vmem levels to create complete
organs such as eyes in nonstandard
places or to suppress tumor formation
not only reveals completely novel as-
pects of the role of bioelectricity in the
specification of growth and form but
also suggests very exciting new oppor-
tunities for regenerative biomedicine.


Correction
August 2013, page 38—In box 2, the
longitude and latitude labels in the fig-
ure were reversed.