[PAGE 1] Multi-scale Chimerism: An experimental window on the algorithms of anatomical control

Vasilios Nanos, Michael Levin*
Allen Discovery Center at Tufts University, Medford, MA, USA
Department of Biology, Tufts University, Medford, MA, USA

[PAGE 1] ABSTRACT

Despite the immense progress in genetics and cell biology, major knowledge gaps remain with respect to prediction and control of the global morphologies that will result from the cooperation of cells with known genomes. The understanding of cooperativity, competition, and synergy across diverse biological scales has been obscured by a focus on standard model systems that exhibit invariant species-specific anatomies. Morphogenesis of chimeric biological material is an especially instructive window on the control of biological growth and form because it emphasizes the need for prediction without reliance on familiar, standard outcomes. Here, we review an important and fascinating body of data from experiments utilizing DNA transfer, cell transplantation, organ grafting, and parabiosis. We suggest that these are all instances (at different levels of organization) of one general phenomenon: chimerism. Multi-scale chimeras are a powerful conceptual and experimental tool with which to probe the mapping between properties of components and large-scale anatomy: the laws of morphogenesis. The existing data and future advances in this field will impact not only the understanding of cooperation and the evolution of body forms, but also the design of strategies for system-level outcomes in regenerative medicine and swarm robotics.

[PAGE 1] 1. Introduction

The need to predict and control large-scale structure of various complex systems given knowledge of their sub-components is a central problem spanning numerous disciplines (Anderson, 1972). Developmental biology is a paradigmatic example, since complex anatomy emerges from the parallel activity of numerous complex subunits which have distinct form and function at many scales and levels of organization (Furusawa and Kaneko, 1998; Varenne et al., 2015). Modular decomposition and recombination is a key strategy in engineering; here, we review a body of experimental data that are invaluable fodder for the search for the meso-scale laws of morphogenesis.

Genomics has made great strides in identifying information encoding the cellular hardware of cells, but it is still not possible to say much about the overall shape of an organism or of its organs from knowing its genomic sequence or the properties of its cells (other than by comparison with molecular data from an organism whose anatomy we already know). Thus, an exciting frontier of research involves understanding the mapping between the properties of subunits to body-scale anatomy in a way that enables prediction and control of system-level outcomes. This is important not only for evolutionary developmental biology, but also for solving the inverse problem: how to set or re-set the properties of low-level subunits (e.g., by editing genomic sequence in cells) to achieve a desired system-level outcome (e.g., by inducing growth of a correct human limb or produce a bespoke synthetic living machine with any specific morphology (Kamm et al., 2018; Lobo et al., 2014)). Transformative progress in regenerative medicine and synthetic bioengineering depends on being able to determine what cell- and molecular-level stimuli would induce desired large-scale changes in organ or whole body structure. The major opportunity to improve fundamental understanding and bioengineering capabilities is the discovery of rules determining large-scale structure and function given knowledge of the components and their microenvironmental boundary conditions. Understanding the reliable emergence of specific forms from competent subunits such as cells will require frameworks describing what will happen in systems consisting of components that on their own lead to distinct emergent outcomes.

Most work in molecular development takes place in standard model systems in their normal environment and configuration, such as zebrafish or mouse, in which a genome reliably gives rise to (and is widely thought to explain) a species-specific morphology. This can occur even despite drastic perturbations. For example, embryos can recover from removal of large amounts of body mass (Cooke, 1979, 1981), and tails transplanted onto flanks of salamanders remodel into limbs (Farinella-Ferruzza, 1956a). Regenerative animals, such as axolotls, repair after amputation damage of limbs and eyes - the cells rapidly proliferate and migrate, stopping when the precisely correct structure of the target morphology is complete (Maden, 2008). Tadpoles with abnormal faces rearrange their craniofacial tissues until a correct frog face is made (Vandenberg et al., 2012). Such observations suggest that default anatomical outcomes are extremely robust (reviewed in (Pezzulo and Levin, 2016)). However, robustness is only one side of the coin with respect to the deep questions of the emergence of large-scale anatomy from cellular components (Levin et al., 2018); the other important aspect is plasticity and ability to produce coherent outcomes in novel circumstances, which haven't been previously "tested" in the course of evolution.

[PAGE 2] Experiments in synthetic bioengineering of wild-type cells are beginning to reveal novel functional forms that can emerge from cellular activity without genomic editing (reviewed in (Ebrahimkhani and Levin, 2021; Kamm et al., 2018)). Moreover, techniques such as specific and brief perturbation of bioelectrical circuits (Durant et al., 2017) can create permanently altered morphologies such as lines of 2-headed flatworms that regenerate to the new body-plan in future rounds of amputation (without any further manipulation or transgenes). Such deviations from genomic-default outcomes underscore the need to understand how form and function are controlled in novel settings, when the starting state and microenvironmental signals are altered. Pushing outside the standard events of single-genome embryogenesis in its typical milieu offers the opportunity to understand the algorithms that guide the changes and stabilization of form (Couzin, 2009; Goldenfeld and Woese, 2011).

How exactly do cellular collectives determine what shapes they will make, and when morphogenesis and active remodeling will stop? The considerable knowledge and capability gap between relying on a familiar anatomy vs. being able to understand the rules and predicting its emergence ab initio is clearly illustrated by the following thought experiment (Fig. 1). Normally, the fragments of round-headed planarian species regenerate flatworms with round heads and stop when they are complete, while fragments of triangle-headed planarian species likewise keep growing and remodeling until flatworms with the normal triangular heads result. What will happen if the neoblasts of one species are mixed into the body of the other – what head shape will result? Will one type be dominant? Will an intermediate shape stabilize? Or will remodeling never cease because neither set of neoblasts is satisfied with the head shape? Despite the numerous high-resolution studies of molecular pathways guiding stem cell differentiation, the field has no models that make a prediction about this scenario. This is because we still lack a formalism for quantitatively modeling the process by which cellular collectives recognize deviations from normal and make the "stop" decision when the error between current morphology and target morphology is small enough (Harris, 2018; Pezzulo and Levin, 2015). A critical aspect of this problem is that the remodeling and stop decisions are made based on large-scale anatomical criteria (length of limbs, distribution of craniofacial components, etc.) - at levels of organization higher than genomes or cells; thus, these are in effect actions of a swarm agent, consisting of numerous parts that work together toward a large-scale stable outcome. In addition to understanding the emergence of shape and anatomical homeostasis toward specific anatomies, such recombination experiments highlight important commonalities between morphogenesis and parallel problems in swarm cognition and group decision-making (Couzin, 2007; Pezzulo and Levin, 2015; Sole et al., 2016).

[PAGE 3] The ubiquitous reliability of stereotypical, default embryogenesis emphasizes a view of hardwired species-specific information within genomes and suggests that predictive control of form and function should be within reach. It tends to obscure surprising, novel phenomena and the deep opportunities for improved rational control, which are only observed when biological systems are confronted with truly novel circumstances or configurations (Ebrahimkhani and Levin, 2021; Kriegman et al., 2021). Here, we survey natural and experimental recombinations of living components (chimeras) at different levels of organization, as a powerful tool for driving a deeper understanding of interoperability, cooperativity, emergence, and control of collective behavior in morphogenesis. We review fascinating examples of transfer of material and information between diverse biological sources, highlighting the central concept of chimerism which can occur at the molecular, cellular, tissue, organ, and even organism and population scales (Box 1).

Many of these experiments were conducted at times when modern molecular biology, mathematical tools of emergence and complexity science, and computer modeling platforms, necessary for conclusive interpretations of the experimental outcomes, were still missing. Their value lies not in offering a complete answer but in showing what is possible; unconventional assays demonstrating interoperability and viability suggest new approaches for developmental biology and bioengineering and reveal new scenarios where our ability to predict outcomes is lacking. We hope to reinvigorate interest in chimerism so that modern approaches can be brought to bear to develop our understanding of the mapping of the properties of subunits toward large-scale outcomes. Furthermore, we discuss a number of chimeric systems that demonstrate functional rather than morphological chimerism. We propose a kind of symmetry that links many diverse biological phenomena, suggesting chimerism as an invariant that ties together a number of disparate approaches at different levels of organization that are not often discussed together in terms of their deep commonalities. This leads to new perspectives on classic problems such as cancer, aging, and genetic heterogeneity as instances of a more general phenomenon – chimerism. Finally, we discuss examples of chimeric techniques as a bridge between biology and related concepts in robotics and cognitive science: taking chimerism as a fundamental linking concept allows interesting new bridges to be forged between open problems in biology and other fields. We conclude with the implications of these data for biology, medicine and engineering, and suggestions for future work in this emerging interdisciplinary field.

[PAGE 3] 2. Molecular chimeras

The ways in which system-level properties of living things are determined by the nature of their molecular constituents are illuminated by the results of recombination at the level of genetic material (Fig. 2A). The first experiments of this kind were natural ones: modern phylogenetic studies show that over billions of years of evolution, genetic material has been exchanged between unicellular prokaryotic organisms such as bacteria, archaea, and protozoa as well as multicellular eukaryotes (originated by the fusion of eubacteria and archaea) such as plants and animals. Thus, all life on the molecular level is profoundly/fundamentally chimeric, causing the "tree of life" metaphor to be replaced by the more accurate "web of life" (Doolittle, 2008).

The process by which distantly related species exchange genetic material is referred to as horizontal gene transfer (HGT), and is mainly driven by conjugation between bacteria and across kingdoms from prokaryotes to eucaryotes (even between bacteria and mammalian cells) via a cellular bridge (McKay, 2002; Waters, 2001), viruses (viral infections), and events of endosymbiosis. For example, sequencing of the Vibrio cholerae genome, which consists of two circular chromosomes, indicates that the smaller chromosome carries a relatively high number of genes that do not seem to have originated in Vibrio itself. The smaller chromosome was likely taken up by Vibrio's ancestor via horizontal gene transfer, presumably providing Vibrio with an evolutionary advantage by carrying genes involved in energy metabolism and DNA repair; this thereby created a unicellular chimera carrying two chromosomes of distinct origin which together regulate the cell's biochemical processes (Heidelberg et al., 2000).

[PAGE 4] HGT, even between distantly related species, plays a critical role in evolving novel traits (Boto, 2014), and has been proposed to be a key driving force in speciation events. For instance, animals such as the ascidian Tunicates, which belong to the urochordates, are among the few metazoans that can produce cellulose via a cellulose synthase-like gene, most likely acquired via HGT from Actinobacteria. This enables Tunicates to synthesize cellulose and integrate it into an extracellular matrix external to the epidermis, serving as a protective layer (Hirose et al., 2011; Matthysse et al., 2004; Sasakura et al., 2016). Genes transferred between bacteria and animals provide especially interesting examples of molecular components that can be exploited in different ways by systems with radically different architectures (Dunning Hotopp, 2011).

The classic form of multicellular molecular chimeras results from combining gametes belonging to different species. Cross-breeding of animals and plants has been observed and performed by humans in agricultural practices for several millennia (e.g., mules). It is estimated that around 10% of animals and 25% of plants hybridize naturally with at least one other species; this process is believed to play an important role in speciation (Mallet, 2005, 2007). The increased fitness of some interspecies hybrids has led to the concept of hybrid vigor (Arnold and Hodges, 1995; Baranwal et al., 2012). It is hypothesized that hybrids are able to combine the main advantages of sexual reproduction (genetic diversity) and clonal reproduction (increased levels of regenerative capabilities) (Bullini, 1994). Consistent with this, the unisexual Ambystoma indeed possess an elevated capacity to regenerate lost body parts in comparison to their diploid sexual relatives (Saccucci et al., 2016). Such assays emphasize our lack of fundamental knowledge via the difficulty of quantitatively predicting in advance the structural features of the hybrid (and deriving those predictions from anatomical properties of the parents). The unisexual all-female salamanders of the genus Ambystoma, believed to be the result of a natural hybridization event some 3.9 million years ago, reproduce via a process called kleptogenesis (Bogart et al., 2009). Despite their unisexual mode of reproduction, females need sperm to induce development of their oocytes and therefore have to "steal" the sperm from males of other bi-sexual salamander species. Individuals have been found with several levels of ploidy ranging from diploid to pentaploid integrating genomes from at least five distinct species due to their ability to switch sperm donor species, resulting in more than 20 different nuclear genomic combinations (Bogart et al., 2009). The morphology of the animals is determined by the number and origin of the inherited chromosome sets, resulting in differences in overall size and allometric proportions between body and appendages as well as color patterning.

[PAGE 4] Remarkably, while amphibians with different ploidies have very different sizes of certain cells, the animals' overall size remains normal and morphogenetic process adjusts to correctly sized kidney tubules (Fankhauser, 1945a, 1945b). This includes using cell:cell interactions between ~8 cells (normal ploidy and small cells) to make tubules, vs. using cytoskeletal control to force one cell to bend around itself leaving the correctly-sized lumen in the middle, when cells are made to be very large. The ability of cell collectives to maintain the same large-scale target morphology despite radical changes in cell-level properties points to fascinating opportunities for future work to identify how diverse lower-level molecular mechanisms are activated in a context-sensitive manner to fulfill higher-level structural specifications. This degree of plasticity has not been achieved in robotics, where the structure and function of artificial machines is extremely sensitive to precise scale parameters of all of their parts. It also raises interesting questions about aspects of evolution that select for plasticity and adaptability to new conditions (such as changes in cell size) vs. short-term optimization of mechanisms to work with a specific extant cell size.

Interestingly, even commonplace sexual reproduction can be seen as a form of chimerism, in which DNA from two different morphotypes of a given species (male and female anatomical forms, which can be quite different) co-exist in the same zygote and drive subsequent morphogenesis. Paternal and maternal imprinting of DNA from parents ensure that many kinds of zygotes are in fact significantly chimeric with respect to genetic information. This is clearly seen when contrasted with the baseline, more "genetically pure" case of parthenogenetic animals. For example, invertebrates such as females of Daphnia (Decaestecker et al., 2009) and nematodes (Triantaphyllou and Hirschmann, 1964), as well as some vertebrates (e.g. fish (Chapman et al., 2008), amphibians and reptiles (Booth and Schuett, 2016) and others) can produce truly isogenic offspring in specific circumstances. In comparison, the introduction of a male, with a different genome, and the integration of sex chromosome signals in the embryo to give rise to one of two possible (male or female) body forms, is a kind of chimerism. The difficulties in rationally predicting specific aspects of morphology from those of two parents (e.g., facial features for humans, or plant morphologies) represent a ubiquitous form of the inverse problem of emergent morphogenesis, which has been realized by farmers and animal breeders since long before formal biological science.

[PAGE 5] Horizontal gene transfer has been performed experimentally, creating a chimeric chromosome by combining two genomes in one cell. Using the newly developed megacloning technique, it was possible to clone and insert the entire 3.5-megabase genome of the bacterium Synechocystis into the 4.2-megabase Bacillus subtilis resulting in a chimeric 7.7-megabase genome. The chimera exhibited no obvious phenotypic differences compared to the host organism, but it is not known whether other important differences (e.g., in response to novel situations, evolvability, or robustness) may remain to be discovered (Itaya et al., 2005). It was shown, via a newly developed technique called genome transplantation, that it is possible to replace the entire Mycoplasma capricolum genome with the genome of Mycoplasma mycoides. The successful replacement of the genomes was confirmed via genotype (PCR) and phenotype analysis (proteomic) (Lartigue et al., 2007). In the laboratory setting, moving genes from one organism to another is a very common method used to probe the contributions of DNA information to form and function, although extensive study in novel environments will be necessary to determine what aspects are and are not converted by this procedure, given that important information also exists in cytoskeletal and other cellular components (Fields and Levin, 2017).

Cross-species transfer of DNA was used as a tool for understanding the evolution of morphogenetic control mechanisms. For example, Pax-6 is a highly conserved master control gene for metazoan eye morphogenesis with homologous genes found in insects and vertebrates, including mice and humans. Its loss-of-function mutations lead to reduced or completely lost eye structures. Although mammals and insects diverged more than 500 million years ago, mouse Pax-6 can still induce eye formation in Drosophila with structural morphology typical for the host (Gehring and Ikeo, 1999; Halder et al., 1995), illustrating the versatile context-sensitive nature of morphogenetic modules, whose internal component mechanisms can change during evolution while maintaining a conserved trigger.

Using the molecular chimerism approach, it was even possible to show how enhancer elements shape social hierarchies in mammals. PAS1 (placental-accelerated sequence), which is not highly conserved within placental and non-placental clades, acts as an enhancer for the transcription factor Lhx2, a gene involved in brain development and social stratification in mice. While male PAS1-deletion mice cannot establish proper social hierarchies, transgenic knock-in mice carrying ortholog sequences of PAS1 from non-amniotic (wallaby and chicken) animals showed different levels of social dominance depending on their genotype, without compromising other aspects of development and behavior (Wang et al., 2020). These examples illustrate how creation of animals with chimeric genetic information can reveal important genotype:phenotype relationships spanning morphology and behavior.

On the level of the gene, chimeric fusion genes (CFG), formed by a process called exon shuffling (Gilbert, 1978), results in the merging of two individual genes; this has been proposed to significantly contribute to the evolution of new genes coding for proteins with novel structures and functions (Jones and Begun, 2005). For example, synthetic fusion genes have been generated to study the function of homeotic genes and their role in establishing the body plan. In Drosophila, mutations in homeotic genes lead to the transformation and replacement of one body structure with another (McGinnis et al., 1984). Expression of the master control gene Antennapedia (Antp) specifies the second thoracic segment, and ectopic overexpression of Antp leads to the homeotic transformation of antennae into second legs (Schneuwly et al., 1987). This was achieved by creating an artificial fusion protein Antp fused to the inducible heat-shock promotor hsp70, which was introduced into the germline via P-element mediated germline transformation (Gibson and Gehring, 1988; Schneuwly et al., 1987). This illustrates the notion of a spatial chimera, where the foreign material or information molecules were sourced not from another species but from a different region of the body. On the level of chromosomes, genetic expression chimeras can occur naturally in female mammals, by sex-chromosome inactivation which is the transcriptional silencing of one of the two copies of the X chromosomes resulting in cellular mosaicism. In calico cats, for instance, this results in a patched color pattern of the fur (Gartler and Goldman, 2001; Panning, 2008), illustrating a natural and ubiquitous chimerism.


[PAGE 5] 2.1. Cancer – a pathological example of somatic chimerism

Mutations are often found in tumors, which exhibit increased genomic instability (Negrini et al., 2010), elevated mutation rates, and epigenetic changes (Chen et al., 1998). The stochastic nature of mutations results in the development of intra- and intertumor heterogeneity with altered levels of gene expression (Burrell et al., 2013; Swanton, 2012). Due to these changes to the host genome, cancer results in high levels of molecular chimerism even within a single solid tumor. Affected cells lose their ability to properly cooperate with their environment, and de-couple from the information processing of cellular collectives that normally keep cells working toward large-scale morphogenetic goals (Chernet and Levin, 2013; Moore et al., 2017). In a sense, cancer cells free themselves by gaining autonomy from the constraints of their collective and regressing to the transcriptional and behavioral properties of unicellular ancestors (Levin, 2019b, 2021; Zhou et al., 2018). Waddington (1935) and Needham (1936) described this process as a "morphological escape" from the controlling influence of the individuation field of the host organism (Needham, 1936; Seilern-Aspang and Kratochwil, 1962; Waddington, 1935). This newly acquired individuality can reach an extent where cancer cells can even leave their hosts, as occurs in the case of facial tumor disease, a transmissible cancer affecting populations of Tasmanian devils with a mortality rate of almost 100%. Since the disease is spread as an allograft through biting during social interactions, it is able to continue to exist even though its original host has ceased to exist long before (Patton et al., 2020), using parasitic chimerism as a strategy to perpetuate the cellular lineage.

[PAGE 5] 3. Subcellular and organelle chimeras

At the next level of organization above the molecular, we consider
mixing of larger subcellular components, such as in "cybrids", or fusions
between cells and cytoplasts (Bacman et al., 2020; Narbonne and Gur-
don, 2012; Narbonne et al., 2012; Narbonne et al., 2011) to examine the
roles of nuclei and mitochondria (Fig. 2B). The chimeric approach was
used initially to address the question formulated by Boveri in 1889
(Boveri, 1889; Boveri, 1893; Hadorn, 1937): are species-specific traits
determined by the nucleus or the cytoplasm?

To study the interplay between, and the respective roles of, the nu-
cleus and the cytoplasm, amoebae, which are relatively large unin-
ucleated eukaryotic cells without a rigid shape, were used (Lorch and
Danielli, 1953b). Enucleation, the removal of the nucleus, results in
disturbed movement and digestion. Remarkably, enucleated amoebae
can survive up to 20 days and even show periods of apparently normal
movement for several days (Lorch and Danielli, 1953a). Similarly,
fragments of human somatic cells can also live without a nucleus for
some time, exhibiting behavior (such as galvanotaxis) that is different
from that of their nucleated counterparts (Sun et al., 2013). Enucleated
cells can be reactivated via homo- or heterologous nuclear transfer
facilitating studies of organelle-level chimerism. After heterotransfer of
the nucleus, the host cell's cytoplasm mainly determines cell shape
during movement (which is species-specific), locomotion pattern, and
the transplanted nucleus's size, according to the host's specific nucleus
size (Lorch and Danielli, 1953a; Lorch and Danielli, 1953b).

A truly outstanding model system in probing the contributions to
large-scale shape of the nucleus and the cytoplasm in morphogenesis is
the unicellular giant Acetabularia. This organism possess a complex
morphology and the ability to live, grow, and regenerate without a
nucleus for up to two months (Hämmerling, 1932). Grafting experi-
ments have shown that when the nucleus-containing rhizoid is ampu-
tated (Fig. 3), followed by a cap amputation a few days later, the cap can
regenerate even without a nucleus (Hämmerling, 1943b). Interspecific
grafting of Acetabularia crenulate rhizoid onto the stalk of A. mediterranea
with a developed cap blastema results in a cap of intermediate
morphological phenotype, meaning that the shape of the cap will be a
hybrid combination of the two species. Future work must address the
mechanisms by which morphogenetic substances (e.g., mRNAs) from
the original nucleus mix with newly synthesized morphogens from the
transplanted nucleus, and ways in which non-chemical morphogenetic
field information can combine (Briere and Goodwin, 1990; Chaplain and
Sleeman, 1990; Goodwin and Pateromichelakis, 1979). If the cap is
subsequently amputated a second time, the second regenerated cap
develops the morphology specific for A. crenulata (Hämmerling, 1932;
Hämmerling, 1934, 1943a, 1943b; Hämmerling, 1953; Maschlanka,
1943; Werz and Hämmerling, 1961). This experiment illustrates that by
mixing subcellular components, which are located in different parts of
the cell, it is not only possible to transform one species into another, but
also to create hybrids occupying regions of morphospace in between the
two original phenotypes and identifies large-scale features that can be
blended.

Nuclear transfer experiments have been conducted in higher or-
ganisms as well. For instance, transfer of somatic endodermal nuclei into
enucleated axolotl eggs was used to test whether somatic nuclei undergo
genetic changes during embryonic development and whether they are
able to keep their ability to induce normal development after nuclear
transfer. It was shown that most nuclei, regardless of their origin, are
able to induce cleavage, but usually do not develop beyond the blastula
or gastrula stages. These limitations suggest a search for the limits of
interoperability, to determine what exactly goes wrong in these cases
that prevents the system from maintaining life (even if not correct
morphology). Nuclear transfer between amphibians, even if they are
distantly related, such as Urodeles and Anurans, will result in normally
cleaved blastula (Gurdon, 1986). Heterotypic transplantations of nuclei
between two subspecies of Xenopus laevis have been shown to develop
viable adult frogs with phenotypes characteristic of the nuclei donor.
Although rare, some individuals showed an intermediate phenotype for
some traits (Gurdon, 1961), suggesting that models of consequences of
chimeric experiments need to include a stochastic component.

Another example of the contribution of the cytoplasm to traits was
provided using the technique of egg constriction. Hadorn fertilized
palmatus eggs with cristatus sperm resulting in haploid hybrid merogones
(with genetic contribution only from the sperm). Since these embryos
don't live long enough to develop species-specific traits that would
distinguish them, Hadorn transplanted presumptive skin ectoderm at
early gastrula stage from the merogones onto wild type hosts (alpine
newt), which allowed for the subsequent development beyond meta-
morphosis into adult stage. The skin of the haploid merogon resembled
the morphology of the egg/cytoplasm-donating species (bumpy) in
contrast to the sperm-donating species whose skin was smooth (Chen;
Hadorn, 1936, 1937). However, cross-genus nuclear transplantation of
the common carp nucleus into the enucleated goldfish egg resulted in
quantities of vertebrae more similar to that of goldfish (28-30) than the
carp (32-36), proving that the cytoplasm can contribute to develop-
mental outcomes (Sun et al., 2005; Sun and Zhu, 2014).

Some of the most remarkable examples of inter-species subcellular
chimerism crosses Kingdoms. Across phyla from protists to multicellular
live forms, organisms have used the strategy of symbiogenesis or
endosymbiosis for acquiring new biochemical capabilities by taking up
parts or entire organisms and integrating them into their own bodies
(Margulis, 2004; Nowack and Melkonian, 2010; O'Malley, 2015). Two
strategies to achieve this, used by animals and plants, are termed klep-
toplasty (the "stealing" of organelles from another organism) (Krause,
2015; Van Steenkiste et al., 2019) and karyoklepty (the stealing of
another species' nucleus) (Johnson et al., 2007; Onuma and Horiguchi,
2015). A remarkable example of kleptoplasty resulting from animal-
plant chimerism is found in the sea slug Elysia chlorotica. These slugs
have the ability to perform photosynthesis, which is most unusual in
animals. They accomplish this by taking up chloroplasts from their algal
food, storing them in their bodies as so-called kleptoplasts, and using the
products of the resulting photosynthesis as an energy source (Rumpho
et al., 2011). Since chloroplasts have lost many of their genes necessary
for photosynthesis via HGT to their original algal hosts' nucleus, it is
surprising that even when the slugs do not consume any algae, photo-
synthesis is maintained for months. It has been shown that genes coding
for proteins necessary for photosynthesis have been horizontally trans-
ferred to the slug genome (Rumpho et al., 2011; Rumpho et al., 2008). It
is striking that E. chlorotica even developed the morphology of a leaf.
Because chloroplasts have transferred a significant part of their
genome into the nucleus of their hosts, they depend on the external
supply of gene products from the host environment in order to stay
functional. Myrionecta rubra, a marine photosynthetic ciliate, preys on
the cryptomonad Geminigera cryophila and steals its chloroplasts. To
avoid a rapid decline in photosynthetic activity of the chloroplasts, it
also commits kleptoplasty by accumulating the foreign nuclei in its
body. Even though the captured nuclei can no longer divide they stay
transcriptionally active in the host's cytoplasm, supplying the chloro-
plasts with the necessary gene products for photosynthesis (Johnson
et al., 2007; Onuma and Horiguchi, 2015).

Chimerism between plants and animals has even been found in
vertebrates. The spotted salamander Ambystoma maculatum embryo
develops in an egg capsule inhabited by the unicellular green algae
Oophila amblystomatis. Living in ectosymbiotic mutualism, the embryo
supplies the algae with nitrogenous waste products. In return, the em-
bryo profits from elevated oxygen levels resulting in decreased embry-
onic mortality (Gilbert, 1944). Recently it was discovered that this
relationship is even closer, with algal cells using oviductal transmission
to invade the embryonic cells and promote the transfer of photosynthate
from the symbiont to the host. Taken together, subcellular chimera ex-
periments suggest that subcellular components such as nuclei and or-
ganelles even of evolutionary distant origin are able to function in a
foreign cytoplasm, and emphasize the role of the cytoplasm with respect
to guiding morphogenetic outcomes.

In addition to spatial structure, chimeras can also be used to test
temporal properties of morphogenesis. Transplanting nuclei from
Tilapia to enucleated eggs of Loach resulted in a developmental rate
similar to Loach, which is much faster than Tilapia egg development.
Furthermore, larvae with transplanted nuclei show no development of
external gills and oral barb rudiments, while Loach larva at a similar
developmental stage possesses these traits (Yan et al., 2004), revealing
that morphogenesis results from the interplay of genetic and epigenetic
factors carried by the cytoplasm.


[PAGE 7] 4. Cellular chimeras

Another kind of chimera is formed by combining cells of diverse
origins and properties (Fig. 2C). These chimeras have been especially
useful in studying cell-extrinsic vs. cell-intrinsic (cell-autonomous vs.
non-autonomous) regulatory mechanisms of development.

For example, in addition to its role in eye morphogenesis, Pax-6 is
involved in the development of the brain. Intrinsic Pax-6 expression is
required by thalamic progenitor cells for normal development of
thalamic neurons (Clegg et al., 2015). Homozygous mouse Pax6-null
mutants show mispatterning of thalamic progenitors and fail to
develop proper axonal projections to the cortex, resulting in neonatal
death. To overcome this obstacle, aggregation chimeras have been
created consisting of Pax-6-/- and wild type (WT) Pax-6+/+ cells. The
WT cells prevented early death and allowed Pax-6-/- cells to develop
projections to the cortex, showing that despite cell-intrinsic lack of Pax-6
expression, those cells still have the ability to make regular axonal
projections (Clegg et al., 2015; Swanson and Goldowitz, 2011; Yeung
et al., 2016).

The range of compatible cell complements is wider than might be
expected, and numerous variations of xenoplastic transplantation ex-
periments involving distantly related taxa have been conducted for
studying neural cell differentiation. For example, adult rat hippocampal
progenitor cells were transplanted into embryonic zebrafish (Sandquist
et al., 2018) and Drosophila nerve cells were transplanted into amphib-
ians (Korochkin et al., 1991; Saveliev et al., 1989; Saveliev et al., 1990);
and even into human Parkinson patients, resulting in reduced tremor for
some patients (Saveliev et al., 1997). The transplanted neurons inte-
grated and differentiated, forming various neural structures and estab-
lishing axonal connections with recipient neural cells and in some cases
resulting in altered behavior reflecting the behavior of the donor
(Alexandrova and Polezhaev, 1984; Andres and Rossler, 1977; Giers-
berg, 1935). The relevance of this work is not its degree of therapeutic
efficacy, but rather to reveal the great degree of interoperability of
biological systems across taxa, which enables future work to study
emergent properties of neural circuits composed of very diverse
components.

Interestingly, xenogenic influences were observed regarding devel-
opmental timing, inducing accelerated development in amphibians
(Korochkin et al., 1991), as well as in human-mouse pluripotent stem
cell co-cultures in a dose-dependent manner (Brown et al., 2020). The
underlying mechanisms regulating developmental rate are an intense
subject of current study (Ebisuya and Briscoe, 2018), revealing both
intrinsic and extrinsic controls. Furthermore, the xenoplastic trans-
plantation of cells between cold- and warm-blooded animals reveals that
many cells can have a broader range of temperatures where they can
remain viable.

Some of the most informative examples of cell-level chimeras were
constructed to study skin patterning (Chen and Chuong, 2012). To study
how genotypic and phenotypic properties of embryonic skin cells relate
to their morphogenetic patterns, Garber used aggregates consisting of
mixed cell suspensions of skin cells obtained from chicken and mouse
embryos at different ages, looking at the formation of feathers using
chick cells and hair formation using mouse cells (Garber et al., 1968).
Aggregates were transplanted on the chorioallantois of chicken embryos
to ensure further morphogenesis. While aggregates consisting of cells
from one species developed the corresponding histological structures
such as feathers (chicken) or hair (mouse), mixed aggregates showed
three types of developmental outcomes depending on the age of the
embryonic cells used. In aggregates of skin cells from older 14-15-day-
old mouse embryos and younger 8-day-old chicken embryos, mouse
cells suppressed feather formation, and only hair formed.


[PAGE 8] Morphogenesis resulted in developing histological structures charac-
teristic of both species such as hair and feathers when 13-day old mouse
skin cells and 8-day-old chicken embryos were used. Cells from one
species contributed to the morphogenesis of histological structures of
the other species. Mouse cells were found to contribute to the formation
of feathers, which was surprising to the authors since the formation of
feathers is not part of the endogenous morphogenetic repertoire of
mammalian cells. The authors concluded that "These mouse skin cells
function in a manner which either is not explicitly programmed in their
genome or is present but never expressed in the usual course of devel-
opment." (Garber et al., 1968; Garber and Moscona, 1964)

Interspecies chimeras have also been used as a tool for cell comple-
mentation studies by knocking out a specific host cell line and thereby
creating an open niche for xenogenic donor cells to occupy. For example,
a mouse-human chimeric platform was used to test human neural crest
cells (hNCCs) derived from pluripotent cells for their ability to integrate
into the mouse organism and contribute to coat pigmentation. Using a
mutant mouse line lacking melanoblasts to avoid competition with host
NCCs, pluripotent human NCCs were injected in utero into mouse em-
bryos. Human NCCs were able to complement missing melanoblasts
resulting in chimeric mice with pigmented hair. In this regard, NCCs are
particularly interesting, showing that human NCCs can detect and
interpret the host environment's xenogenic cues crucial for proper NCC
migration and functional integration into the host embryo (Cohen et al.,
2016).

Chimeras between cells with different internal clocks have illumi-
nated the embryogenesis of nervous systems, somitogenesis, stem cell
differentiation, and other developmental processes in which time-
keeping is an essential aspect of morphogenesis (Ebisuya and Briscoe,
2018). Heteroplastic transplantation of blastomeres between zebrafish
as donor and medaka as host at the blastula stage was used to create
interspecies chimeras addressing the problem of developmental timing
and intrinsic vs. extrinsic factors of development in the context of retinal
neurogenesis. The grafting resulted in the growth of an ectopic retina,
which followed the zebrafish donor cells' species-specific developmental
timing. The transplant was able to use the cues of its surrounding host
environment for navigating axonal outgrowth. Furthermore, the zebra-
fish retina had the potency to induce lens formation by the host tissue,
resulting in chimeric eyes (Fuhrmann et al., 2020).


[PAGE 8] 5. Tissue-level chimeras

The next level of organization to consider exists at the level of tissues.
Work on tissue chimeras, especially in plants, has a long and rich history
with early references on plant grafting in the Hebrew bible and in Chi-
nese literature more than 2000 years ago (Mudge et al., 2009). The
oldest evidence on plant grafting was found in Sumerian cuneiform
fragments from Mesopotamia, where the technique was probably
discovered 3800 years ago (Harris et al., 2002; Mudge et al., 2009); it is
thought that Sumerians may have grafted salt intolerant grape shoots
onto salt-tolerant wild grape rootstocks to increase crop yield.

Grafting in plants does occur quite frequently and naturally, when
shoots or roots of the same or different plants grow in close proximity
which can result in the fusion of the two structures (Mudge et al., 2009).
Three different graft combinations can occur: i. self-grafts, where
structures of the same plant fuse, ii. intraspecific grafts between struc-
tures of two different plants of the same species, and iii. Interspecific
grafts between different plant species (Bormann and Graham, 1966).
The cells of the grafts develop apoplastic and symplastic connections via
plasmodesmata resulting in a graft interface allowing for the exchange
of cytoplasmic content (Coetzee and Fineran, 1989; Tiedemann, 1989).
In 1972 it was concluded that natural root grafting facilitates coopera-
tivity between trees allowing the exchange/transfer of nutrients such as
carbohydrates, water and minerals to neighboring trees in need (and
thereby increasing resilience) (Eis, 1972). In his book "The Variation of
Animals and Plants under Domestication" Darwin coined the terms
"graft hybrids" and "graft hybridization" claiming that grafted parts
exchange properties that are heritable, resulting in plants different from
the donors (Darwin, 1897; Wu et al., 2013b). Even though Darwin's
ideas were met with skepticism at the time, recent advances shed light
on the underlying mechanisms for exchanging and modifying genetic
material between grafted plants. Research indicates that the transfer of
RNA and DNA fragments, of entire plastid genomes, or alterations in
DNA methylation, all can induce heritable changes in graft hybrids (Liu
et al., 2010; Stegemann and Bock, 2009; Thyssen et al., 2012; Wu et al.,
2013a). Also, chimerism at the tissue level can automatically induce
subcellular chimerism, as tissue grafting can lead entire mitochondria to
be transferred horizontally via tunneling nanotubes, extracellular vesi-
cles, and cellular fusion (Torralba et al., 2016).

The literature on animal tissue chimeras is extensive, with the
earliest and most famous experiments conducted by Hans Spemann and
Hilde Mangold on the transplantation of organisers and various other
tissue types, studying their inductive capabilities and potencies using
frogs and salamanders as model systems (Mangold, 1929; Spemann,
1921, 1924; Spemann and Mangold, 1924; Spemann and Schotté, 1932).
Using Triton taeniatus embryos at early gastrula stages, Spemann tested
the developmental potencies of the ectoderm. Through the homeoplastic
exchange of the presumptive epidermis and presumptive neural plate,
he showed that the transplanted parts were able to develop according to
their new positions (Spemann, 1918). The same was true for hetero-
plastic transplantations between Triton taeniatus and cristatus (Spemann,
1921), where differences in both species' pigmentation allowed for later
developmental analysis of the transplanted tissue (Harrison, 1898,
1903). Spemann and Mangold have also shown that heteroplastic
transplantation of a fragment of the blastopore lip (organizer) behaves
very differently. Instead of integrating with the surrounding tissue, it
keeps its identity and induces a secondary embryo with a neural tube,
notochord, and somites formed by the host tissue (Spemann, 1918;
Spemann and Mangold, 1924). Xenoplastic transplantation of fish
organizer from Danio rerio into amphibian Triturus can induce neural
plate formation of the proper host size even though the grafted organizer
size is significantly smaller than the host organizer (Oppenheimer,
1936). Approaches like this are essential to our understanding of how
borders are set up for specific structures during morphogenesis, and of
the information signals which bind neighboring cells into working to-
ward one or another component of the overall target morphology.

Mangold used xenoplastic transplantations to study the development
of the balancer, using Triton, which develops adhesive threads during
early larval stages, and Axolotl, which do not develop these structures.
Transplantation of Axolotl neural plate tissue into the flank or blastocoel
of Triton embryos at the neurula stage induced ectopic adhesive threads;
in contrast, transplantation of Triton neural plate into Axolotl neurula
would not induce any adhesive thread development, illustrating a
technique for determining which tissues are responsible for specific
anatomical features.

In a second set of experiments, he showed that the epidermis is
responsible for the development of the balancer. Transplantation of
presumptive epidermis from Triton embryos into the future face area of
the Axolotl embryos resulted in the formation of adhesive threads.
Conversely, the transplantation of Axolotl presumptive epidermis results
only in the development of structures that are familiar to the Axolotl
epidermis, such as eye lenses and gills (Mangold, 1931). These experi-
ments illustrate the interplay between a tissue with an inductive ca-
pacity and the induced tissue itself, which needs to possess the potency
to develop a given structure under the influence of the inducer.


[PAGE 9] Along similar lines, Sengel and Dhouailly performed a series of
dermo-epidermal recombination experiments between reptiles, birds,
and mammals, studying the development of the corresponding cuta-
neous structures of scales, feathers, and hair (Fig. 2D). Dermo-epidermal
recombination through xenoplastic grafting of the epidermis between
different species has shown that the induction and development of
cutaneous structures such as scales, feathers, and hair are a two-step
process. In the first step, the dermis exerts a non-class specific induction
signal inducing the differentiation of epidermal placodes (precursor of
the specific structure such as scale, hair), which means that, e.g., mouse
dermis can induce the development of feather formation and,
conversely, chicken dermis can induce the formation of hair papillae. A
second dermal induction is required for proper development, which is
class-specific and cannot be transmitted across species. As a result, the
development of cutaneous structures in recombinants gets arrested at an
early stage (Dhouailly, 1975; Sengel, 2003; Sengel and Dhouailly,
1977).

An example of developmental control via tissue-level chimerism is
observed with respect to intercalary growth. In amphibian, insect, and
crustacean limbs, rotation of grafted tissue induces the growth of ectopic
structures at the boundary (French, 1980; Meinhardt, 1983; Mittenthal
and Nuelle, 1988; Muneoka and Murad, 1987). This is due to disconti-
nuities in the axial coordinates of tissue: sites at which neighboring cells
possess non-adjacent positional information will undergo significant
morphogenetic activity to resolve the discrepancy and fill in (interca-
late) the missing positional values via growth and remodeling. Such
experiments in vertebrate limbs and planaria (Agata et al., 2003; Saito
et al., 2003)) reveal that informational chimerism (with respect to po-
sitional information) is detected by tissue and used as an input to
morphogenetic decision-making to coordinate growth and repair.
Remarkably, the same phenomenon is observed in single cells (such as
ciliates, (Nelsen and Frankel, 1989; Shi et al., 1991)), suggesting that
this design principle is re-used at different levels of organization, from
subcellular to tissue-level positional information (Agata et al., 2003;
Saito et al., 2003). Another example of tissue-level chimerism exerting
effects on patterning concerns malignant neoplasms (disordered
growth), in the absence of DNA damage or oncogenic mutations,
induced by the in vivo juxtaposition of tissues that are not normally
adjacent, such as testis and spleen or ovary and spleen (Biskind and
Biskind, 1945; Biskind and Biskind, 1944).


[PAGE 9] 6. Organ-level chimeras: from structure to function

Transplantation can be used to create chimeric bodies consisting of a
mix of organs of diverse origins, which is especially helpful to under-
stand not only the structural but also the functional aspects of the part/
whole relationship (Fig. 2E). For example, transplantation of the eye cup
has been used to study induction, as transplantation of additional eye
cups can induce ectopic lenses (Twitty and Elliott, 1934). This reveals
the modularity of development and highlights the control points that
can be used in the context of a wild-type genome to modulate anatomy.
Trying to understand the underlying mechanisms of organ scaling and
organ intrinsic and extrinsic factors involved in size regulation, classical
workers used the technique of grafting entire functional units such as
limbs, eyes (Harrison, 1929; Twitty and Elliott, 1934), heart
(Copenhaver, 1927, 1930, 1939), and spinal cord between the two sal-
amander species Ambystoma tigrinum (larger and faster-growing) and
Ambystoma punctatum (smaller and slower growing). In his classic paper
"Some unexpected results of the heteroplastic transplantation of limbs",
Harrison observed that forelimbs from A. tigrinum transplanted onto the
forelimb position of A. punctatum after a short period of slow growth not
only catch up and grow to the size specific for the donor but significantly
exceed it in size. On the other hand, transplantation of A. punctatum
forelimbs onto A. tigrinum results in even smaller limbs than the original
donor limb size (Harrison, 1924). These experiments showed that both
limbs are able to grow and develop in the new host environment and
suggest that limb size is regulated by a combination of organ-intrinsic
properties and extrinsic factors. One possibility is that A. tigrinum
limbs on A. punctatum bodies have a competitive advantage (or higher
sensitivity) for those external resources such as nutrients and growth
factors (growth hormones) provided by the host body (such competition
within the body is reviewed in (Gawne et al., 2020)).

Transplantation of eyes between the two species results in eyes very
similar to the size of the donor species, showing little effect of the new
environment on eye growth (Twitty and Schwind, 1931). Chimeric
composite eyes generated by exchanging the lens of one species for the
other's lens revealed a coordinative organ internal scaling relationship
where lens size regulates the size of the developing retina (Harrison,
1929). From a functional perspective, this makes sense since the eye's
proper function strongly depends on the internal proportions of the lens
and retina. On the other hand, transplantation of the heart and spinal
cord resulted first in the transplanted organs' growth according to their
intrinsic genetic program, showing adaptation to the new host envi-
ronment (Copenhaver, 1939). Again, from a functional perspective, it is
essential that vital organs such as the heart have the proper size in
relation to the body, and recent molecular experiments have shown
bioelectric properties (Beane et al., 2013; Daane et al., 2018; Lanni et al.,
2019; Perathoner et al., 2014) and biochemical signals (Vollmer et al.,
2017a; Yamamoto and Mak, 2017) to be mechanisms by which organ
primordia coordinate size control. Different organs can have different
mechanisms of size regulation. An example of organ intrinsic size
regulation was demonstrated by the transplantation of multiple fetal
thymus glands into a developing mouse embryo resulting in glands of
regular size (Metcalf, 1963). On the other hand, transplantation of
multiple fetal spleens shows a coordinated growth of all spleens result-
ing in smaller individual organs but with total mass similar to one
normal spleen (Metcalf, 1963; Vollmer et al., 2017b).

Another rather spectacular finding by Farinella-Ferruzza resulted
from xenoplastic transplantation of the tail bud from Axolotl (urodele)
onto Anuran embryos during the neural stage. The transplanted tail bud
first develops into an anatomically normal and functional tail. When the
tail bud is transplanted into the host's limb field, it transforms during
metamorphosis into a limb with a variable number of digits (Farinella-
Ferruzza, 1950; Farinella-Ferruzza, 1956b). Holtfreter performed a
similar set of experiments and found that tail blastema transplanted at
heterotopic sites into the limb field can transform into limb or gill-like
structures influenced by the morphogenetic field of the host (Holtfr-
eter, 1955). These are intriguing experiments showing that remodeling
and morphogenetic change can be induced not only by wounding, but
also by deviations from correct global form (an appendage being in the
wrong place), since the tips of the transplanted tails had no trauma and
were locally in a correct environment but nevertheless transformed.
Such data reveal global error-correcting homeostatic loops (Friston
et al., 2015; Kuchling et al., 2020; Pezzulo and Levin, 2015, 2016). The
classical papers showed that grafts sometimes induced the growth of
supernumerary limbs, which could fuse with the induced tail and form a
limb-tail chimera, suggesting fascinating questions around how large-
scale anatomical target morphologies (the arrangement that, once ach-
ieved, causes further growth and remodeling to cease) are encoded and
detected by mixed cell populations.

One of the most important aspects of organ-level chimerism is the
opportunity to study robustness of function. Transplantation of super-
numerary eyes at ectopic positions has shown that eyes can adapt to
their new position and alien host environments. Axonal projections can
still be formed and do not depend on following typical pathways for
growing to their proper target structures in the brain (Constantine-Paton
and Law, 1978; Harris, 1980; Hibbard, 1959; Sharma and Hollyfield,
1980). In Xenopus embryos, it has been shown that heteroplastically
transplanted eye primordia onto ectopic positions along the body,
including the tail, not only develop into anatomically functional eyes but
develop optic nerve connections to the posterior spinal cord. Behavioral
analysis (instrumental training with color cues) confirmed that the
tadpoles could perform well in visual tasks despite having no primary
eyes, and that the brain could readily learn to interpret visual infor-
mation generated at ectopic positions without the need for lengthy
evolutionary adjustments to the new bodyplan layout (Blackiston and
Levin, 2013).

Sensory organs, such as eyes, play a significant role in peripheral
information processing. To test whether an increase in the sensory

[PAGE 9]
process. In the first step, the dermis exerts a non-class specific induction
signal inducing the differentiation of epidermal placodes (precursor of
the specific structure such as scale, hair), which means that, e.g., mouse
dermis can induce the development of feather formation and,
conversely, chicken dermis can induce the formation of hair papillae. A
second dermal induction is required for proper development, which is
class-specific and cannot be transmitted across species. As a result, the
development of cutaneous structures in recombinants gets arrested at an
early stage (Dhouailly, 1975; Sengel, 2003; Sengel and Dhouailly,
1977).
An example of developmental control via tissue-level chimerism is
observed with respect to intercalary growth. In amphibian, insect, and
crustacean limbs, rotation of grafted tissue induces the growth of ectopic
structures at the boundary (French, 1980; Meinhardt, 1983; Mittenthal
and Nuelle, 1988; Muneoka and Murad, 1987). This is due to disconti-
nuities in the axial coordinates of tissue: sites at which neighboring cells
possess non-adjacent positional information will undergo significant
morphogenetic activity to resolve the discrepancy and fill in (interca-
late) the missing positional values via growth and remodeling. Such
experiments in vertebrate limbs and planaria (Agata et al., 2003; Saito
et al., 2003)) reveal that informational chimerism (with respect to po-
sitional information) is detected by tissue and used as an input to
morphogenetic decision-making to coordinate growth and repair.
Remarkably, the same phenomenon is observed in single cells (such as
ciliates, (Nelsen and Frankel, 1989; Shi et al., 1991)), suggesting that
this design principle is re-used at different levels of organization, from
subcellular to tissue-level positional information (Agata et al., 2003;
Saito et al., 2003). Another example of tissue-level chimerism exerting
effects on patterning concerns malignant neoplasms (disordered
growth), in the absence of DNA damage or oncogenic mutations,
induced by the in vivo juxtaposition of tissues that are not normally
adjacent, such as testis and spleen or ovary and spleen (Biskind and
Biskind, 1945; Biskind and Biskind, 1944).

[PAGE 9]
6. Organ-level chimeras: from structure to function
Transplantation can be used to create chimeric bodies consisting of a
mix of organs of diverse origins, which is especially helpful to under-
stand not only the structural but also the functional aspects of the part/
whole relationship (Fig. 2E). For example, transplantation of the eye cup
has been used to study induction, as transplantation of additional eye
cups can induce ectopic lenses (Twitty and Elliott, 1934). This reveals
the modularity of development and highlights the control points that
can be used in the context of a wild-type genome to modulate anatomy.
Trying to understand the underlying mechanisms of organ scaling and
organ intrinsic and extrinsic factors involved in size regulation, classical
workers used the technique of grafting entire functional units such as
limbs, eyes (Harrison, 1929; Twitty and Elliott, 1934), heart
(Copenhaver, 1927, 1930, 1939), and spinal cord between the two sal-
amander species Ambystoma tigrinum (larger and faster-growing) and
Ambystoma punctatum (smaller and slower growing). In his classic paper
"Some unexpected results of the heteroplastic transplantation of limbs",
Harrison observed that forelimbs from A. tigrinum transplanted onto the
forelimb position of A. punctatum after a short period of slow growth not
only catch up and grow to the size specific for the donor but significantly
exceed it in size. On the other hand, transplantation of A. punctatum
forelimbs onto A. tigrinum results in even smaller limbs than the original
donor limb size (Harrison, 1924). These experiments showed that both
limbs are able to grow and develop in the new host environment and
suggest that limb size is regulated by a combination of organ-intrinsic
properties and extrinsic factors. One possibility is that A. tigrinum
limbs on A. punctatum bodies have a competitive advantage (or higher
sensitivity) for those external resources such as nutrients and growth
factors (growth hormones) provided by the host body (such competition
within the body is reviewed in (Gawne et al., 2020)).
Transplantation of eyes between the two species results in eyes very
similar to the size of the donor species, showing little effect of the new
environment on eye growth (Twitty and Schwind, 1931). Chimeric
composite eyes generated by exchanging the lens of one species for the
other's lens revealed a coordinative organ internal scaling relationship
where lens size regulates the size of the developing retina (Harrison,
1929). From a functional perspective, this makes sense since the eye's
proper function strongly depends on the internal proportions of the lens
and retina. On the other hand, transplantation of the heart and spinal
cord resulted first in the transplanted organs' growth according to their
intrinsic genetic program, showing adaptation to the new host envi-
ronment (Copenhaver, 1939). Again, from a functional perspective, it is
essential that vital organs such as the heart have the proper size in
relation to the body, and recent molecular experiments have shown
bioelectric properties (Beane et al., 2013; Daane et al., 2018; Lanni et al.,
2019; Perathoner et al., 2014) and biochemical signals (Vollmer et al.,
2017a; Yamamoto and Mak, 2017) to be mechanisms by which organ
primordia coordinate size control. Different organs can have different
mechanisms of size regulation. An example of organ intrinsic size
regulation was demonstrated by the transplantation of multiple fetal
thymus glands into a developing mouse embryo resulting in glands of
regular size (Metcalf, 1963). On the other hand, transplantation of
multiple fetal spleens shows a coordinated growth of all spleens result-
ing in smaller individual organs but with total mass similar to one
normal spleen (Metcalf, 1963; Vollmer et al., 2017b).
Another rather spectacular finding by Farinella-Ferruzza resulted
from xenoplastic transplantation of the tail bud from Axolotl (urodele)
onto Anuran embryos during the neural stage. The transplanted tail bud
first develops into an anatomically normal and functional tail. When the
tail bud is transplanted into the host's limb field, it transforms during
metamorphosis into a limb with a variable number of digits (Farinella-
Ferruzza, 1950; Farinella-Ferruzza, 1956b). Holtfreter performed a
similar set of experiments and found that tail blastema transplanted at
heterotopic sites into the limb field can transform into limb or gill-like
structures influenced by the morphogenetic field of the host (Holtfr-
eter, 1955). These are intriguing experiments showing that remodeling
and morphogenetic change can be induced not only by wounding, but
also by deviations from correct global form (an appendage being in the
wrong place), since the tips of the transplanted tails had no trauma and
were locally in a correct environment but nevertheless transformed.
Such data reveal global error-correcting homeostatic loops (Friston
et al., 2015; Kuchling et al., 2020; Pezzulo and Levin, 2015, 2016). The
classical papers showed that grafts sometimes induced the growth of
supernumerary limbs, which could fuse with the induced tail and form a
limb-tail chimera, suggesting fascinating questions around how large-
scale anatomical target morphologies (the arrangement that, once ach-
ieved, causes further growth and remodeling to cease) are encoded and
detected by mixed cell populations.
One of the most important aspects of organ-level chimerism is the
opportunity to study robustness of function. Transplantation of super-
numerary eyes at ectopic positions has shown that eyes can adapt to
their new position and alien host environments. Axonal projections can
still be formed and do not depend on following typical pathways for
growing to their proper target structures in the brain (Constantine-Paton
and Law, 1978; Harris, 1980; Hibbard, 1959; Sharma and Hollyfield,
1980). In Xenopus embryos, it has been shown that heteroplastically
transplanted eye primordia onto ectopic positions along the body,
including the tail, not only develop into anatomically functional eyes but
develop optic nerve connections to the posterior spinal cord. Behavioral
analysis (instrumental training with color cues) confirmed that the
tadpoles could perform well in visual tasks despite having no primary
eyes, and that the brain could readily learn to interpret visual infor-
mation generated at ectopic positions without the need for lengthy
evolutionary adjustments to the new bodyplan layout (Blackiston and
Levin, 2013).
Sensory organs, such as eyes, play a significant role in peripheral
information processing. To test whether an increase in the sensory

[PAGE 10]
capacity could increase the learning rate in animals, removal of natu-
rally occurring eyes and/or transplantations of ectopic eyes onto sala-
mander larvae were performed (Schneider and Pietsch, 1968). Using a
light-dependent behavioral avoidance assay, acquisition rates were
tested in normal salamanders with two eyes, one eye, Triclops with three
eyes (two natural eyes plus an additional eye), and Cyclops with the two
normal eyes removed and one grafted eye. Information processing and
learning rates were measured. Surprisingly, Cyclops animals learned at a
much higher rate (Schneider and Pietsch, 1968), suggesting that there
must be other benefits of having two eyes that balance this effect in
terms of evolutionary fitness.
Whole and partial brain transplantations have been used to study
some basic principles of behavior (Balaban, 1990; Balaban et al., 1988;
Gahr, 2003) and brain development (Balaban et al., 1988; Le Douarin
et al., 1997; Long et al., 2001; Streit and Stern, 2014). Chick-quail brain
chimeras have been produced by transplanting quail mesencephalic and
diencephalic primordium to the chicken brain at the 8- to 15 somite
stage for studying crowing behavior. The transplantation resulted in
chimeras producing segmented crowing sounds uncharacteristic for
chicken, with a temporal pattern specific for quail (Balaban et al., 1988),
suggesting that different aspects of behavior have distinct degrees of
modularity or localizability. Moreover, beyond inborn instinctual be-
haviors, the same assays can be used to test the dynamics and locali-
zation of learned information - testing the possibility of memory transfer
between organisms (Pietsch, 1981; Pietsch and Schneider, 1969). For
instance, reports have been published on brain transplantation between
salamander larvae and frog tadpoles looking for changes in feeding
behavior (Balaban, 2003; Pietsch, 1972; Pietsch, 1981; Pietsch and
Schneider, 1969), with transfer of behavioral patterns and memory
(measured as improved performance on specific tasks) being reported.
If we are committed to the idea that memory resides in the brain,
then it is inevitable that an appropriate transfer of the memory medium
should also transfer the memory. However, the amphibian memory
transfer experiments have been inconclusive, and much more can be
done to address this question, as it bears directly on the nature of
memories, their encoding/decoding by an organism, and the mecha-
nisms of cohesion of neural tissues into a single cognitive Subject as
owner of experience and memory (Ameriks, 1976; Wilson and Arch,
1972). Attempts to show this have been made in a variety of animal
model systems (Holt and Bentz, 1983b; Miller and Holt, 1977b; Reinis,
1968; Setlow, 1997). Modern experiments on chimeric memory content
have successfully focused on injection of RNA extracted from the central
nervous system of trained donors into naïve animals as demonstrated in
the marine mollusk Aplysia (Bédécarrats et al., 2018), or injection of
brain and liver RNA extracts and brain tissue homogenate in rats (Holt
and Bentz, 1983a; Miller and Holt, 1977a; Whiddon et al., 1976). Thus
future experiments in chimeric memories within one functional organ-
ism could involve mixtures of cellular, molecular, or tissue-level
information.


[PAGE 10]
7. Parabiosis
Even larger-scale organism-level chimeras can be made via para-
biosis - an old technique first performed in 1864 using mice, where two
whole bodies are surgically connected resulting in the development of a
shared circulatory system (Bert, 1864). Such experiments have been
used to study the determination of embryonic left-right asymmetry in
amphibia (von Kraft, 1999) and birds (Levin, 1998, 1999, 2001; Levin
et al., 1997), where the spillover of lateralization molecules such as
Sonic hedgehog and Nodal from one side of one body affects the LR
identity of the adjacent side of the second body. This revealed much
about the signaling range, timing, and nature of the large-scale asym-
metry signals, especially since the geometry and relative ages of the two
embryos were controlled during the grafting, showing how specific
factors such as Sonic hedgehog and Nodal can cross between embryos and
impact the acquisition of identity information by half of the body based
on information obtained from the grafted adjacent body.
Punctatum tigrinum whole-body chimeras have been created by
uniting the larvae's anterior and posterior portions, resulting in viable
graft hybrids with each half and its appendages showing scaling re-
lationships according to the donor species (Burns and Burns, 1929;
Church, 1956). Heterochronic parabiosis, which is the surgical fusion of
two organisms of different age, e.g. an adult and a juvenile, have been
used to study the process of aging, showing that a supply of "young
blood" or blood serum can counteract the effects of aging at the mo-
lecular, structural and functional level (Villeda et al., 2014). This phe-
nomenon has been shown to be induced by the transfer of factors such as
GDF11 (Katsimpardi et al., 2014) and hormones like oxytocin (Elabd
et al., 2014), resulting in the rejuvenation of aged stem cells and thereby
increased levels of regenerative potential (Conboy et al., 2005). It is not
yet known whether young blood can counteract the age-related devel-
opment of cancer.
A natural form of parabiosis referred to as sexual parasitism is found
in some anglerfish species. The males of some anglerfish can be signif-
icantly smaller than the females and fuse permanently to the female
body, developing a shared circulatory system and becoming dependent
on blood-transported nutrients by the host female. In return the males
supply the female with sperm, turning the female into a self-fertilizing
hermaphrodite (Pietsch, 2005). Taken together, the work on fusions of
entire bodies presents new perspectives on the mechanisms, and the
functional consequences, of boundaries on the border between the self
and the outside world. It enables the study of homeostatic and other
physiological systems when the scale of a single body is radically
expanded (being the complementary technique to the study of ex-vivo
organ culture which fragments whole bodies into autonomous subunits).

[PAGE 10]
8. Population-level chimeras
Populations can be regarded as a very high scale of biological or-
ganization (Fig. 2E). Living in groups, organisms often show collective
behaviors resulting in synchronized movement and migration patterns
as observed in fish schools and animal flocks (Couzin and Krause, 2003),
the formation of the migrating slug in Dictyostelium (Hashimura et al.,
2019), dynamics of cancer cells (Deisboeck and Couzin, 2009), and even
bacteria in biofilms (Gloag et al., 2013; Ishikawa et al., 2020). The
spatio-temporal structures formed by organismal groups are studied by
the field of collective intelligence (Couzin, 2007; Heylighen, 2013),
which illustrates at this larger scale important invariants between the
computations of patterning agents in morphospace and those of
behavioral systems in functional space (Fields and Levin, 2020; Pezzulo
and Levin, 2015).
Eusocial insects such as ants and termites are known for their ability
to collectively build nests and mounds resulting in structures which can
be several meters high (Korb, 2003), with complex architecture and
functionality maintaining homeostasis (Turner, 2009a). The architec-
ture of the mound depends on the species and the environmental con-
ditions (Ocko et al., 2019). The mound structure itself is involved in
maintaining homeostasis between the termites and its own structure,
regulating temperature, carbon dioxide concentrations and air humidity
at constant levels (also referred to as extended or embodied physiology)
(Turner, 2005). Furthermore, it shows characteristics of a living or-
ganism, such as growth, development and regeneration mediated by
feedback loops between the mound and the termites (Ocko et al., 2019;
Turner, 2009b).
These structures can be understood as a form of an extended
phenotype or body (Turner, 2004). As an analog to cells which use
themselves as building blocks to build the body of a multicellular or-
ganism through the process of morphogenesis, termites build the
structure of their mounds using soil as material. Since no single termite
is thought to have an internal representation of the actual mound
structure, the collective must rely upon simple genetically encoded
behavioral rules that use local information (such as pheromones) to


[PAGE 11]
successfully build the mound (Ocko et al., 2019) - a classic example of
emergent complexity arising from parallel execution of local rules by
active agents. Such animals also utilize an indirect form of communi-
cation via deposited chemical signals, known as stigmergy (Theraulaz
and Bonabeau, 1999). This enables the collective intelligence of the hive
to coordinate the building of complex mound structures, using the
environment as an informational scratchpad - the memory medium of
the collective intelligence of the group (Heylighen, 2016a, 2016b;
Khuong et al., 2016a; Khuong et al., 2016b). The multi-scale nature of
this process is revealed by the same design principle exploited in bac-
teria to coordinate colony structure and function (Gloag et al., 2016),
and by cells in the body using extracellular matrix information to co-
ordinate somatic morphogenesis (Yan and Lin, 2009).
Since the mound architecture emerges from non-linear collective
behavior based on local information and local interactions, it presents us
(as does morphogenesis) with the inverse problem of trying to predict its
shape from known behaviors of individual ants. Parallel to the problem
of inferring interventions in regenerative medicine, one could ask which
ant behaviors need to be changed to alter mound structure toward a
specific shape, and whether this is most efficiently done by manipulating
the genes of the ants or by specific stimuli during the construction
process. Much could be learned by introducing into the collective bio-
logical or engineered individuals whose behavior differs from that of
others.
It is unfortunately very difficult to perform such "population-level"
chimeric grafting experiments, as olfaction-based cues are used to
implement aggressive self vs. not-self distinctions inhibiting the

[PAGE 11]
cooperation of individuals from different populations and species (much
as immune incompatibilities hamper certain kinds of somatic chimerism
experiments). Nevertheless, some experiments have worked around this
problem to a degree, by amputating a portion of the antenna, the
anatomical structure where smell is located (Fielde, 1903). A different
method is to raise larvae of different species together, which accustoms
them to the odor of individuals from different colonies (Fielde, 1903),
and perhaps future work using transgenic ants or use of psychoactive
compounds could overcome this resistance to chimerism at the colony
level.
An exemption to this behavior occurring in nature are slave-making
ants that capture the brood of other (usually closely related) species and
integrate them into their own work force (Breed et al., 2012; Topoff and
Zimmerli, 1991). To our knowledge there are no reports on how this
affects the nest architecture, but it has been shown in laboratory settings
that ants of different worker types with different sizes (small and big
ants) of the same species (and colony) create different nest architectures.
A mixture of small and big ants (Fig. 4) results in the emergence of a new
nest structure with an increased number of branches and an architecture
that can't be predicted by the sum of nest morphologies created by the
two different ant worker types (Kwapich et al., 2018). This and previous
studies reveal that ants might use their body length as a template for
construction (Khuong et al., 2016b; Kwapich et al., 2018), showing how
chimeric experiments can shed light on the computational properties
(such as measurement and decision-making mechanisms) of collectives
(whether made of cells or whole organisms).
The relationship between solving problems in 3-dimensional space


[PAGE 12]
(such as behavior or mound construction) and in anatomical morpho-
space (building or repairing specific body structures) is seen in forms
such as slime molds: for example, Physarum polycephalum explores and
navigates the world via outgrowth and die-back – for this animal, active
morphogenesis is its behavior (Beekman and Latty, 2015; Murugan
et al., 2021). And this fascinating transitional case of problem-solving in
very different spaces can also be analyzed by chimerism. Different
species of cellular slime molds are able to form chimeras, under some
circumstances resulting in chimeric fruiting bodies. In each case the
number of cells is dominated by one species determining the
morphology of the fruiting body (Jack et al., 2008). One paper reports
the emergence of a chimeric phenotype (Raper and Thom, 1941). For
mixed bacteria that are involved in biofilm formation, it has been shown
that it is possible to generate chimeric biofilms with new fractal or
flowerlike biofilm morphologies unlike the inherent morphology of
either contributing species (Xiong et al., 2020). Many opportunities exist
to use microbes to understand the emergence of colony-level form
driven by metabolic, game-theoretic, evolutionary, and biophysical
phenomena (Ben Jacob et al., 1992; Ben-Jacob, 1998, 2003, 2009; Ben-
Jacob et al., 2006; Jacob et al., 2004; Norris et al., 2011).
Population level chimeras can even span across several taxa as is the
case for lichen, a composite organism arising from the symbiotic rela-
tionship of fungi with algal and/or cyanobacterial photobionts living as
extracellular endosymbionts surrounded by fungal filaments. Interest-
ingly, lichen possess a high level of morphological diversity; at the same
time, morphologically similar phenotypes can arise from unrelated
fungal taxa with various combinations of photobionts (Honegger, 1991).
This provides exciting opportunities to understand cooperation and
competition.
In recent years, synthetic robotic swarms emerged as a new tool for
studying the inverse problem: the difficulty of inferring what changes
need to be made to the functional properties of individual agents in
order to make desired changes to the structure or function of the system-
level collective. Individual robots equipped with sensors for distance
measurements and programmed with a simple set of behavioral rules are
able to form complex structures as a swarm based on local interactions
(Korb, 2014; Rubenstein et al., 2014; Werfel et al., 2014). Swarm ro-
botics is a medium in which conceptual aspects of chimerism, and the
development of strategies for predicting stable goal states of swarm
dynamics, can be studied (Barca and Sekercioglu, 2013; Brambilla et al.,
2013; Gomes et al., 2013; Trianni and Campo, 2015). In addition to
physical robots, simulations including cellular automata and neural
network components, with many surprising and emergent features, are
powerful tools with which to understand how large-scale control and
global properties arise from the interactions of diverse subunits
(Mordvintsev et al., 2020; Wang-Chak Chan, 2018). In this way, Artifi-
cial Life research is poised to help biologists develop computational and
conceptual tools to understand complexity.

[PAGE 12]
9. Conclusion
"At first they led a somewhat wretched existence and lived without
rule after the manner of beasts. Oannes ... had the whole body of a
fish, but above his fish's head he had another head which was that of
a man, and human feet emerged from beneath his fish's tail. He
taught them the use of letters, sciences and arts of all kinds. He
taught them to construct cities, to found temples, to compile laws,
and explained to them the principles of geometrical knowledge."
-From Ancient Fragments, by I.P. Cory.
The significance of chimeras for driving increases in knowledge has
been known long before the common era. One of the oldest known
mentions of a mythological chimera is the Sumerian amphibious half-
man half-fish hybrid god called Oannes (Uanna in Sumerian) from the
4th century BCE. Oannes taught humanity the arts and sciences, how to


[PAGE 13]
read and write, how to build cities and how to create a functioning so-
ciety. In short, he was believed to have brought humankind all the
emergent properties of culture and civilization. It is an intriguing
thought that this pre-scientific civilization was already using the idea of
chimerism to understand the emergent properties of human culture.
Today, centuries later, we are again using the concept of chimerism in an
attempt to understand the emergent properties of life.
All living things are deeply multi-scale, modular systems defined by
the interactions of subunits within and across levels of organization. The
science of complexity (Adami, 2002; Csete and Doyle, 2002) has given
rise to a number of paradigms relevant to understanding collective dy-
namics, including cellular automata, dynamical systems theory, network
theory, and deterministic chaos (Goodwin, 1994; Kauffman, 1993;
Mitchell, 2009). However, the work of predicting system-level proper-
ties and multi-scale relationships from interaction rules of molecular
components is just beginning; moreover, the general ability to infer low-
level rules sufficient to drive desired high-order structures is an even
more distant goal. Similarly, evolutionary game theory offers a rich set
of formalisms for understanding the conditions under which subsystems
with diverse origins and goals might cooperate or compete (Axelrod
et al., 2006; Rainey and Monte, 2014; Szathmary and Maynard Smith,
1997). Despite the many studies highlighted above, which reveal aspects
of control in specific chimeric cases, inferring general principles and
design strategies for understanding chimeric configurations remains as a
future goal. The hard work of predicting degree of cooperation from sub-
system rules, inferring and rationally modifying the large-scale out-
comes of such cooperation, and taming combinations of cooperation and
competition (Gawne et al., 2020) in biomedical contexts and engineered
systems has only begun. This presents an important future challenge and
an exciting opportunity to develop the science of complexity and learn
to understand, predict, and tame emergence and the scaling of proper-
ties. Moving beyond standard components to test the interactions and
emergent higher-level dynamics of composite living systems is a
powerful tool for reverse-engineering biology. This is especially true
since artificially combining subunits that have not had eons of evolu-
tionary selection to hone their interactions reveals aspects of plasticity,
interoperability, and origins of novelty. Thus, the study of how mole-
cules, cells, tissues, etc. act to create a specific anatomical outcome re-
quires continuous cycles of inquiry in which understanding of subunits
drives insight into larger scales of organization, while in turn questions
at these higher levels suggest new experiments to reveal more about the
capabilities of the subunits (Fig. 5A,B).
We suggest that numerous kinds of experiments, in contexts ranging
from molecular biology to swarm ecology, are instances of one powerful,
common approach: multi-scale chimerism, whether experimental or
natural (Table 1). All of these examples have in common the ability to
shed light on the key question for the 21st century: how higher-level
properties emerge from the properties of individual components.
Despite its long history we have very little ability to make predictions
about morphological and functional outcomes of chimeric systems;
therefore chimeras are a crucial complement to the study of pure sys-
tems, whose reliable morphogenesis and evolutionary history obscure
fundamental questions. It is taken for granted that frog eggs make tad-
poles, and Axolotl eggs make larval axolotl. But how are the setpoints for
anatomical homeostasis in regulative development and regeneration set
in the context of collectives containing a mix of genetic and cellular
material from diverse species? What will frog embryo cells and Axolotl
cells make when mixed together? Will the end product have legs (like
Axolotls do, and Xenopus embryos do not)? And if so, will those legs
contain Xenopus cells? How do genomes function in such novel envi-
ronments? What new aspects of cooperation and competition are
revealed (Gawne et al., 2020), when the normally tight linkage between
genetic relatedness and somatic proximity is made to diverge? Few
predictions on such questions can be made in advance, despite the
growing deluge of genetic information and molecular pathway details.
The ability to mix diverse biological components into whole

[PAGE 13] 
functional systems has several important consequences. First, it em-
phasizes fundamental knowledge gaps that are present, but not
apparent, in work on pure, standard model systems and phylogenetic
lineages. Second, it creates opportunities to improve our predictive
understanding of morphogenetic scaling and collective decision-
making. Third, it provides model systems different from existing or-
ganisms, enabling the study of novel forms outside specific contin-
gencies of the biosphere's evolutionary history.
Thus, one of the most enticing aspects about chimerism is how it
highlights what we do not know. In making explicit our lack of ability to
predict the resulting morphology of chimeric forms, this work draws
attention to our basic inability to predict anatomical forms from genetic
or cell biological data even within one species. As with developmental
biology, machine learning could be used to predict the outcomes of such
experiments. However, the black box problem (interpreting successful
Al systems via human-understandable rules, to gain insight in addition
to performance) will loom large, as the difference between successful
prediction of specific cases vs. deep understanding of the algorithms of
life (Sero et al., 2019). These knowledge and capability gaps require not
only more molecular detail or big data, but also the use of techniques
from computational and cognitive sciences to understand the origin and
encoding/decoding of target morphology information for anatomical
homeostasis (Levin et al., 2018; Pezzulo and Levin, 2015, 2016), and to
understand how collectives (molecular, cellular, and swarm) make
system-level decisions (Friston et al., 2015; Heylighen, 2013; Kuchling
et al., 2020; Sole et al., 2016). Experimental models for testing insights
from these approaches are emerging in the field of synthetic bioengi-
neering (Doursat and Sanchez, 2014; Doursat et al., 2013; Macia et al.,
2017; Olle-Vila et al., 2016; Sole, 2016a, 2016b; Sole et al., 2016; Urrios
et al., 2016).
While numerous facts about specific developmental processes can be
discerned based on individual cases described above, there are a few
general conclusions that are suggested by the body of work on chime-
rism. The first is that the many disparate types of recombination ex-
periments, done by diverse communities (molecular geneticists,
developmental biologists, behavioral scientists working on swarm in-
telligence, etc.) are in fact facets of one unified approach. Chimerism
results from the powerful engineering strategy of modular reconstitu-
tion, which can be applied (in parallel) on multiple scales of organiza-
tion, from molecules to whole communities. Second, this is not only a
strategy for scientists to better reverse-engineer life, but is also a strategy
used by evolution for fascinating and important augmentation of the
basic (vertical) Darwinian cycle. Third, both the natural and bioengi-
neering versions of chimerism work because of remarkable interopera-
bility of living components at all scales. Recombining DNA, molecular
circuits, organelles, cells, tissues, etc. results in coherent living organ-
isms even when their sources are evolutionarily quite distant. This may
suggest important revisions to notions of cooperativity based on genetic
relatedness toward notions based on informational or computational
compatibility. Together with the increasing appreciation of competition
within bodies (Gawne et al., 2020), an emphasis on chimerism suggests a
systems view of components that interact in highly diverse combinations
across boundaries of standard model system bodies (Fields and Levin,
2017; Fields and Levin, 2018; Fields and Levin, 2020). Fourth, chime-
rism reveals life's plasticity and ability to produce adaptive structure and
function in novel circumstances. Chimeras, consisting of components
that have never lived together in evolutionary history, form viable new
life forms even without a lengthy history of selection to lubricate their
mutual interactions. This reveals and highlights the ease and speed with
which biological novelty can be produced, and suggests that
[PAGE 14]
components can be evolved individually and recombined later – a very
powerful property that both engineers and evolution exploit for rapid
development of complex systems.
These features suggest new aspects of the evolution of bodies and the
relationship between genomes and anatomies (Levin, 2020). They also
have strong implications for synthetic bioengineering efforts to make
novel living constructs (Kamm and Bashir, 2014; Kamm et al., 2018;
Kriegman et al., 2020) that can contain DNA, cells, and tissues from
numerous species, as well as inorganic components (passive nano-
materials and AI-bearing electronics in the context of brain-computer
[PAGE 15]
interfaces (Chamola et al., 2020; Green and Kalaska, 2011)). The in
silico evolution (Kriegman et al., 2020) and design (Kamm and Bashir,
2014; Kamm et al., 2018) of bioengineered organisms will shed much
light on the plasticity of genomic exploitation of generic physics (Arias
Del Angel et al., 2020; Newman, 2016) and cellular decision-making in
novel contexts (Baluška and Levin, 2016). At the same time, chimeric
assembloids (Panoutsopoulos, 2020; Sahu and Sharan, 2020; Vogt,
2021) will provide critical basic knowledge for biomedical efforts to
control complex, system-level outcomes. Importantly, advances in this
interdisciplinary area are as useful for basic biology and biomedicine as
for robotics, which likewise struggles with developing strategies for the
design and control of multi-scale robotic swarms (de Oca et al., 2010;
Nishikawa et al., 2016; Patil, 2014; Slavkov et al., 2018). The possibility
of chimeric forms with emergent new structures and functions will not
only result in useful synthetic living machines and cybernetic organisms,
but will also provide a near-infinite collection of "model systems" for
exploring not only the results of Earth's specific evolutionary timeline,
but Life as it Could Be (Langton, 1995).

[PAGE 17] References (excluded)

[PAGE 19] (No discernible section header, but continuing the References section, which is excluded)