Perfect. Okay, thank you so much. Very excited to be here and share some ideas with you. I'm going to say some kind of large scale conceptual things in addition to some data that I'm going to show you. And it's hard to do that in, in 15 minutes. So if anybody wants to download the primary data, the software, the, you know, all of that stuff is here. And then this is just a personal blog where I try to write about what I think some, some of these things mean. And this is a lot of what I'll say at the end is work done in collaboration with Josh Bongaard's lab as part of this ICDO organization that we have. And what I'm going to describe today is this notion of agential materials and a way of interacting with your materials that are more around the concepts of collaboration and literally a kind of social engineering with your material. Because we view these things as a collective intelligence that we want to motivate, not just rewire or micromanage. And so one of the great challenges in our field, which is both synthetic morphology and biomedicine, is that someday you want to sit in front of a computer and you want to draw the plant animal, biobot, organ, whatever you want, with no limitations really. And what this thing should do is compile that description down to a set of stimuli that would be given to cells to get them to build whatever you want, such as this three headed flatworm. And of course, if we had something like this, a lot of problems in biomedicine would go away and a lot of problems in bioengineering would be solved. But as we all know, we don't have anything remotely like this. We can only do this in a very small, if at all, in a very small set of circumstances. And I think that's largely because we've been thinking so far about either passive matter, now increasingly active matter, computational materials. But in biology, I think what we're dealing with is what I call an agential material. It's a material that at multiple scales has agendas and problem solving capacities which we have not largely have not yet taken advantage of. And so for me, the anatomical compiler is not some sort of 3D printer. It is a communications device. It is a translator between your goals as the engineer and the goals of the material. Because I do think that in the cybernetic sense the material has goals, in fact many of them. This is the sort of thing we're dealing with now. This is a pre living organism called Alacrimeria. But you get the idea It's a single cell. There's no brain, there's no nervous system. It's handling all of its needs in anatomical space and metabolic space and physiological space. From that one cell normally develop all of these kinds of amazing creatures, including these that will actually have very significant problem solving cognitive capacities. What we know from developmental biology is that this is a slow and grad. There is no specific magic line at which intelligence kicks in. This is a process of scaling competencies, not a process of magical categories. And so we need to understand the scaling in order to have good interactions with the material. In fact, it turns out that even below the single cell level, so just the molecular networks themselves, let's say gene regulatory networks or molecular pathways, already have six different kinds of learning that they can do. This does not require a cell or synapses or any of that, just the molecular pathways themselves. And this is a free gift from the mathematics of networks. They can already do habituation, association, pavlovian conditioning. And we're now taking advantage of all of that for experiments in drug conditioning for biomedical purposes. And so the material has these capacities sort of all the way from the very bottom. And what I think is happening here is a kind of multi scale competency architecture where each level, and so here are all the levels of organization. Each level is basically deforming the option space for the levels below, but each level is navigating that space. Context sensitive navigation of the option space. And these are transcriptional spaces, physiological state spaces, anatomical morphous space. And then at some point when nerve and muscle kicked in, then of course, three dimensional space of behavior. But all of this kind of relationship, relationship is present all the way down. And what each level is doing is deforming the option space for its parts to ensure that their conventional behavior is also serving the needs of a higher level in a different space that the parts don't know anything about. This enables some very interesting properties in the biological material. First, just as an example, and we could do hours and hours on these examples, there are many, many cool versions of this. Here's a tadpole of the frog. And so you'll see nostrils, mouth, brain, here, gut. What you'll notice is that we've prevented the primary eyes from forming, but we've put an eye on its tail. What we noticed by building a machine that automates the training and testing of these guys in visual cues is that they can see perfectly well. Here's the ectopic eye. It makes one optic nerve. Sometimes it goes to the spinal cord, sometimes to the Gut, never to the brain. And yet they can see and they can learn in visual tasks. Now that's kind of amazing. Why does this animal, with a novel sensorimotor architecture, not require new rounds of mutation selection adaptation? No, it works out of the box. And the plasticity for these kinds of things is absolutely enormous. And we can really take advantage of this in bioengineering. It's not just animals, plants do this too. Development is an incredibly reliable process. And you might think that what the oak genome encodes is the ability to build this flat green thing. It does it all the time, very consistently, except that along comes a non human bioengineer, this wasp, and it puts down some prompts that cause these cells to build something completely different. Okay, so here's this round, spiky red and orange thing, here's another one. They're called galls. There's an amazing variety of them. And they're not made from insect cells, they're made from plant cells. And they're not built the way that wasps build their nests, which is basically a 3D printing approach where it goes around and sort of builds it piece by piece, it lays down some signals and it basically hacks the morphogenetic competency of these plants, which, by the way, we would have had no idea that they're even capable of this if, if, if we hadn't had this, this example. And that opens the question of what does the latent space look like? What else are they capable of building? Now, in order to find out what they're capable of building, we are going to have to ratchet up our own intelligence. And you can see there's a, there's a cool relationship between the sophistication of the hacker and the complexity of what it actually builds. So bacteria basically induce galls that are featureless. Slumps, fungi kind of do the same. So nematodes and mites kind of make something that has a shape, but by the time you get to insects, you get this kind of beautiful structure. So basically there's a bidirectional relationship between how smart we are as hackers and what we can get the material to do. And as I pointed out, we as humans, because of our own evolutionary history, are obsessed with three dimensional space. We are okay at recognizing intelligence of medium sized objects moving at medium speeds through the three dimensional space that we're used to. But biology has been navigating all these other spaces and in particular doing the sensing, decision making, actuation loop in all kinds of other spaces, high dimensional, weird spaces that are hard for us to visualize, like transcriptional space, anatomical morph space, which is what we study, physiological state space, and so on. So embodiment is really not just about motility in three dimensional space. When we build these things that navigate space spaces in ways that we would like them to do, we have to think beyond just motion in three dimensional space. All of these other spaces, and probably many that we can't even visualize, are fair game for this. Now this is another thing I could talk for hours about, but I'm just going to show you one slide. In our group, we've been studying one particular kind of cognitive glue that binds individual cells with their agendas in transcriptional space and physiological space and so on into large scale multicellular constructs that navigate anatomical space. There are several kinds at least, but one kind of cognitive glue, much like in the brain, that does exactly the same thing for your neurons, making you more than just the pile of neurons, is bioelectricity. And so we have now ways to read and write electrical states into non neural tissue. We've developed these techniques over the last 20 years to basically take all of the tools of cognitive neuroscience and bring them into understanding the decision making, the memories, the problem solving capacities of non neural cells in navigating the space of possible shapes. And this, because now we understand what the cognitive glue is, we can start to use that as an interface to communicate new goals to the tissue. And so here, for example, and we could do this with drugs, with optogenetics, there are many ways to do it. But by injecting specific MRNA's, guided by a computational model that I don't have time to show you, we can introduce specific bioelectric patterns into the early embryo and convey very high level messages. Here in this case, we've put in a message that says, build an eye. Here you go. It makes a complete eye with lens, retina, optic nerve, all that stuff. Now, we don't know how to micromanage the building of an eye. It's a very complex organ, lots of genes expressed, lots of cell types in a very stereotypical order. We have no idea how to micromanage any of that. Luckily, we don't need to. Like with any good cognitive system, there are simple stimuli that result in very complex behaviors that the system knows how to do that you don't have to worry about. And the material has some really cool properties. For example, this is a cross section taken through a lens sitting in the tail somewhere. What you'll notice is the blue cells are the ones we injected all this other stuff that participates, we never touched it. This is secondary instruction. We told these cells, you should build an eye. And they intrinsically know that there's not enough of them to do it. And so they recruit their neighbors, so they propagate their abnormal bioelectrical state to their neighbors. And then the whole thing makes a decision to build a nice coherent lens. We don't have to hit every cell. So these are the. And we didn't have to teach it to do that. It already does that. So these are the kind of competencies of, of this material, top down control modular communication where we can talk about an organ, not genes, not cells of individual type and so on. We can talk about whole organs. And cracking this bioelectric code is the main or one of the main efforts in our lab as to how we're going to really maximize our ability to communicate with this material. The last few things I just want to show you have to do with synthetic kinds of living constructs that don't have the benefit of eons of evolution, where we can say, well, it makes an eye, because of course it evolved a high level subroutine call that causes eyes to form because that's what the evolutionary history gave. What happens with beings that have no specific history of selection for this form factor? I'm sure Josh has already shown you some of this. This is basically epithelial cells taken from a frog embryo. And when you take them away, so we don't edit the DNA, we don't put in synthetic biology circuits, there are no scaffolds, there are no drugs, no nanomaterials. All that we do is we engineer by subtraction, meaning that these cells normally are going to be bullied by these other cells and forced into being a boring two dimensional outer cover for the tadpole that keeps the bacteria out. But if you subtract this influence away and you ask what do these cells intrinsically want to do, then you see something interesting. They don't just crawl away from each other, they don't die or form a monolayer. They self assemble. And you can see actually each one of these circles is a single cell. So here's this tiny little thing that doesn't hurt, that it looks like a little horse or something, it makes its way over here, it's moving around in a very interesting way that we still don't understand how it moves. There's a little calcium flash as it interacts with this, with this big one. So these are xenobots and they have some amazing Behaviors. They've repurposed their cilia to move through the fluid. You can see that here. They can go in circles. They can patrol back and forth like this. You can make weird shapes out of them like this donut thing. They have collective behaviors that we're still studying. Here's a xenobot navigating a maze. You know, we have no idea it's, it's self powered. We don't need to actuate it at all. We have no idea what, what guides. At this point, we're studying all that, but the decision making, you know, why it turns around at this particular spot. There's no liquid flow here. There are no gradients, there's no food. It takes this corner without having to bump into the opposite wall. And then at some point, it spontaneously turns around. So all of these kinds of things are completely spontaneous. We're not pacing it or controlling it. Now, one of the studies that we've made of it is what are the transcriptional, what does the transcriptome look like of a creature that has a novel lifestyle that has not been selected for? It turns out that it has hundreds of genes that are expressed very differently than these same cells back in the embryo. I'll just show you one example of what it does as it dips into the genome to pick out novel things that are there for this lifestyle. There's a whole cluster of genes that actually is associated with sensory perception of sound. And we thought that's kind of amazing. Is it possible that these things could actually hear or respond to sound? And so what we did was this experiment. We put a speaker under this. And again, this is just brand new kinds of things. But it turns out that they absolutely do change their behavior when you provide these kind of sound stimuli. So, you know, these little tight circles. As soon as you turn on the sound, they do this. And then eventually they go. When you stop, they go back to this. Not exactly the same. So maybe there's a little bit of residual memory, but we're trying to figure that out. So all of these things, we're now doing behavioral experiments to ask, what do they remember? What can they learn? What are their preferences? And the last thing that I'll just show you is that this is not some weird fluke of frog development. This little thing, which looks like we got it off the bottom of a pond somewhere, is actually, if you were to sequence it, It's Homo sapiens, 100% wild type Homo sapiens. These are anthrobots made of human tracheal epithelial Cells. And they also do some interesting things. If you played a bunch of human neurons and you put a big scratch through it, they will traverse that scratch, but then they'll pick a spot and sit down and they sort of form the superbot cluster. And what you see is that what they're actually doing is healing the gap. They can actually induce repair. If you lift them up four days later, this is what it looks like. They can actually induce repair across this gap. So who would have known that your tracheal epithelial cells have the ability to form this autonomous little biobot, run around and heal wounds? They have thousands, about 9,000 genes differently expressed than the tissue of origin. Tons of amazing things here that we're still mining. Four discrete behaviors that you could build a behavioral ethogram of. And we're also working on trying to understand what their protocognitive properties look like. And so the very last thing that I'll just say, and this is, you know, kind of the weirdest, the weirdest part of this is that we have to start thinking, if it wasn't a history of selection, which, which people take to, to, to explain this, this path, this kind of thing, you know, what, what are these xenobots turning into? If it, if it wasn't direct engineering, which we didn't do, all we did was liberate the cells. We didn't program them in any way. And if it wasn't selection, where does other information come from? And I just want to pitch this, this, this idea that, you know, we do have a precedent for information that does not come from the physical world. In other words, this is a, this is a mathematical object called a heli plot of this little function. And if you want to ask why does it have the particular shape that it has? The answer is not anything about its evolutionary history. It's not anything about any facts of physics. It comes from other laws of mathematics that many Platonist mathematicians are studying as a structured, ordered set of patterns. This map of mathematics. I just want to argue, and again, this would take hours to do this properly. But just to point out that I think we need to go a lot far beyond emergence as an answer to the question of where do these properties come from? And we need to ask what are the structured patterns that we are releasing here? And I view these synthetic beings as vehicles for exploring this latent space. And I think this is the research program. And so as we make cyborgs and hybrots and biobots and all these kinds of things, yeah, they're Combinations of evolved material, engineered material, sometimes software, but also patterns from the space of mathematical patterns that are not to be found specifically among the laws of physics. And I think just by itself, emergence is not going to do the trick. We really need to develop tools to understand, to map out that space and map out the interactions between the physical interfaces that we make and the patterns that we see. And so this, now the ability to use all of these amazing features of the living material is part of the field of diverse intelligence where and we are trying to use some AI tools to communicate across all the different levels. So that's it. I'm going to stop here and just summarize. What I've tried to say is that in biology there's this multi scale competency architecture of nested problem solvers. We as evolution can, can exploit this material via prompts and training, not just rewiring or micromanagement. Tools are coming online to communicate with these systems via bioelectrics and of course other modalities. Lots of, lots of applications. And finally, I think that we really need to pay a lot of attention to what you might call the intrinsic motivation of the system. Not, not just programming, not just reinforcement learning, but actually understand what it is that, that these things can do, aside from what we've made them do. And so I'll just stop here and thank the people who did the work. So our postdocs, some, some, some amazing postdocs and grad students that did the work that I showed you today, lots of collaborators that work with us, always thank the funders and of course most of all to the model systems, both biological and synthetic, in every combination that has taught us all of these things. So I'll stop here. Thank you. Any questions from the audience? Yes, hello, It's Ines Barringham, B2 student from Sheffield. So I want to ask you about your insights. If we using Kaufman principles, like dealing with the biological cells as reaching steady states in a non liquid environment, or use it our dealing models the biological cells in quantum undeterministic rules. This will help us to predict what its behavior and making it. We predict it so we can know what it will do, so we can control it by controlling its behavior, without controlling it really. So I want to hear your insight about this. Thank you. Yeah, my current framework for all of this stuff is that I think the most powerful advances in predicting their behavior, in manipulating their behavior and so on, are not going to come from thermodynamics or from quantum biology, although I'm sure those things have important Things to tell us. I think the biggest impact on this is going to come from behavioral and cognitive neuroscience, because I think that those things, those disciplines are not about neurons at all. They're about much more fundamental aspects of different modalities that function as a cognitive glue that basically scale the competencies of subunits and project them into novel problem spaces. And there is a wealth of information there that have so far approaches both experimental and conceptual, that have so far been deployed around brains and development. But all of this stuff works in many other contexts. So not just the learning and molecular networks, but use of hallucinogens, of anesthetics, of serotonergic modulators to literally change the priors, the decision making, the certainty, all these kinds of things that you normally think of when dealing with animals. All this stuff works, as far as I can tell, all the way down. And so to me, all of this, that is where the biggest advances are going to go is from the field of diverse intelligence applied to bioengineering. And there's a massive opportunity there because actually that field is very focused on natural animals of all kinds. They think about bacteria and unicellular organisms and whales and things. But actually at those meetings there have been very few bioengineers. And so the opportunity for a cross fertilization of this, of these field and roboticists, the opportunity are massive, I think. Other questions? Thanks so much, Michael, as always. Good to see you. Curious about the sound, how you chose that. Is it just like a really nice, precise, non invasive way to do mechano transection, or was there another reason that sort of motivated that choice? Okay, so the question of sound to begin with was simply because we did the transcriptomics and we found this cluster of hearing genes and we thought, okay, maybe this thing is trying to, maybe this is the bigger picture here, I think, is the idea that these novel systems with a novel lifestyle are problem solving in the sense that they. And I have other examples we could talk about that dip into their genome to start to transcribe things that are going to be useful in this lifestyle. Right. And so this, this sort of primed us when we saw the hearing, is that, okay, let's, let's just test it now in terms of what the sound, what the sound is. The only thing we've published so far is one single wavelength is a sine wave and that's it, right? One, one frequency and it's a sine wave. We are currently testing everything from a full frequency sweep to we play different kinds of music that we Let them talk to each other, because, you know, there's a million things. And so the jury's very much still open on what they're doing with that information. While I'm sure the molecular view of this thing is some sort of mechanotransaction, that's probably how they're hearing. I mean, they're using, you know, they're using cilia the same way that we do and so on. So I'm sure at the, at the lowest level, that is probably exactly what they're doing. But at a higher level, what I want to understand is ecologically, why are they. Why. Why is this now important? Why are they to trying transcribing these genes? And on the computation side, I want to know how it is. What is the internal causal architecture that allows that system to go from this is my environment to now this is what I want to transcribe. How is it? And the other examples that we've had in our lab have to do with, for example, flatworms identifying just a half dozen genes out of a. Out of a genome of tens of thousands, when it's. When that. That will allow it to overcome a novel toxin that it's never seen before. So, so, so we have these experiments where we hit them with something that's never been around during evolution. Within, you know, within a week, they find. They find the solution. And so how do they find it? Because this, I think, has massive biomedical implications. So I think all of this has the two layers. Right. There's the biophysical layer where it's like. Yeah, it's mechanotransduction, no doubt. But the bigger question is what information is processing, how and why. Hi, I'm wondering if you have any thoughts. You know, we're in this field, especially with the muscle tissue. We're, in a sense, we're trying to replicate the form and function of an organ that exists in a, you know, as a part of an organism. Yep. But at the same time, we are exposing it to conditions and an environment where I would guess, you know, especially after learning about your work, like, the cells are in some way trying to do this problem solving on their own. And so I'm wondering, like, from. In terms of us trying to advance the function of the tissues, do you have any thoughts about, like, the way we should be approaching treating these cellular collectives? Should we just go off? Should we try to copy in vivo environments or, you know, explore other alternatives? Anyway, yeah. So the two approaches to this that I've written about and also that we are trying to follow in our lab are first of all, training. So I think it would be. And you guys have a lot more expertise in actually setting up the muscle side of this than I do. But rewards and punishments and training of cells and tissues for specific outcomes. So building closed loop, this is one thing we're doing now, not with muscle, but for other reasons, is build a closed loop device that continuously rewards for desirable behavior and exploiting the learning capacity to basically train, not physically force, but to train the cells to do what you want them to do. That's the first thing. The second thing, which you can do with that same kind of platform is instrumental learning. In other words, you can ask the cells what they want to do by giving them control over the environment. In other words, you set up a closed loop system where different actions lead to different outcomes. And in effect, you get to ask the cells, you let them find the kinds of behaviors that give them the stimuli and the outcomes that are meaningful to them. And I think by doing that, we learn more about the system and then we can become much better at motivating them. And I always think back to. Humans have been training dogs and horses thousands of years before we knew any neuroscience, and we had no idea about mechanisms. But what we did understand is that they have this amazing interface that if we understand the currency of, of the way that they learn. So rewards and punishments and behavior shaping paradigms and all this kind of stuff, then you can get some amazing outcomes, Even if you're not micromanaging the synaptic chemistry. I have a feeling that that's what we're going to need to do here is to get a much better idea of what do the cells actually want to do, what do they value as rewards and negative reinforcement, and how can we do behavior shaping to get them to do it.