And thank you to all of you for having me here to exchange some, some thoughts with you. If you're interested in following the details of any of this work for the papers, the software, the data sets, everything is here. And then here are some personal takes on what I think it all means. Let's think about our bodies and some of the magic that actually happens every day. If I told you that with the power of my mind alone, I could depolarize, electrically depolarize something like 30% of the cells in the body, you might think that I'm talking about some sort of yoga practice or some very unusual mind body medicine. But actually this is exactly what happens every day during voluntary motion. When you wake up in the morning, you may have very high level executive goals, social goals, career goals, whatever. And in order for you to execute behavior that implements those goals, this intent must move ions across the cell membrane in your muscle cells. So this ability of high level intelligence and its goals to control the chemistry of the body is not some rare and unusual phenomenon. It is the everyday miracle that is implemented by the electrical system of the body. There's a scientist called Fabrizio Benedetti who, who has this beautiful phrase through his work on the placebo effect. And we'll come back to this at the end. He says words and drugs have the same mechanism of action. And this is because the intelligence of the mind and the mechanisms that drive the physiology and the morphology of the body are really part of the same system. And this is very important, I think, for the future of medicine. And this is what I will talk about today. The first thing to realize is that all of us are in an important sense, collective intelligences. Not just ants and, and termites and bird flocks and things like that, but all of us, because we are all made of a very interesting agential material. This is a single cell. This is called the Lacrymaria. It's a free living organism, but it's a single cell. It has no brain, it has no nervous system, and yet it has these amazingly competent behaviors to solve all of its local single cell level problems. And if you look inside of the cell is also all of this stuff. All of us are really Collective intelligence is made of many components. And these components are not only complex, but they also have agendas. They also have, as I will point out, a kind of intelligence. And this becomes very important for the future of medicine. Within this cell that I just showed you are some molecular networks. And you might think that in order to have memory, to have Learning to have intelligent problem solving, you would need many of these cells, maybe even you think they need neurons or a brain or something like that. But what we is that, and other people have found this as well, is that even within single cells, the molecular networks, so gene regulatory networks, protein pathways, things like this already exhibit many different kinds of learning, including Pavlovian conditioning. And you can find that in the details in these papers. But in these molecular networks, if you stimulate various nodes by providing agonists to turn on specific elements in this pathway and you trace what happens to certain output nodes, you will find that you, you can see dynamics of habituation, sensitization, associative conditioning, and probably much more. We're looking for many other things. Now the ability to learn and to solve problems is baked into the very bottom of the substrate of which we are all made. In fact, the whole body functions as something we call a multi scale competency architecture, where all the way from the bottom. So the molecular networks, the subcellular organelles, the cells, the tissues, the organs and groups and colonies, you see that each level of organization solves problems. It is not just the structurally nested set of dolls, one within the other, but actually it is a set of diverse intelligences which solve problems in different kind of spaces. And I will talk about how that works. So let's think about the end game of medicine. What are we really looking for? I think that in the future, someday you will be able to sit in front of a computer and you will be able to Dr. Draw the anatomy of the plant, animal, organ or biobot that you want, whatever it is, you can draw anything you like, any anatomical structure whatsoever. And if we have this anatomical compiler, what it will do is convert that description into a set of stimuli that have to be given to cells to get them to build exactly this, in this case, this nice three headed flatworm. Now why we need something like this is clear. If we had the ability to convey our goals to groups of cells, then all of this would be solved. There would be no more birth defects, traumatic injury, cancer, aging, degenerative disease. All of this would be solved if we had the ability to tell cells what to build. Now why don't we have this? Molecular biology and biochemistry have been advancing wonderfully over the decades. Why don't we have anything remotely like this? I think that's because we've been thinking about this problem in the wrong way. Many people when they see this, they think, well, this is some 3D printer control gene expression, something to put the cells where they need to go to form whatever structure you want. But I want to propose the idea that we should be thinking about this differently. This is not a 3D printer. This is not about micromanaging the cells. This is supposed to be a communications device. It's supposed to be a translator to convert your goals as the bioengineer or the worker in regenerative medicine. It's supposed to translate your goals into those of the cellular collective. In order to understand what I mean, let's ask where does the body come from in the first place? Here is a cross section through the human torso. You can see incredibly complicated organs. Everything is in the right place, and so on. But we all start life like this as a collection of embryonic blastomeres. Where does this pattern actually come from? You might be tempted to say that it's in the DNA, of course, the human genome. But we know now we can read genomes. And even long before that, we knew that genomes don't really code for any of these patterns. What the genomes code for are the proteins. They directly encode the hardware that every cell gets to have. Once you have that hardware, you still have to figure out how the physiological software grows a particular structure. How does it know when to stop? What happens if cells decide to do something different? In the case of cancer, for example, if something is missing or damaged, how do we induce them to repair and to rebuild it again? And as engineers, although I won't talk about this today, we have a lot of work asking, what else can these cells build? Can we get build something completely different that is not what their native outcome is at all? And I want to point out that in order to solve this problem, genetic information is not enough. There's a lot of excitement about genomics and CRISPR and things like that. And I just want to point out the deep and fundamental problem here. This is a baby axolotl. These salamanders, at this juvenile stage, they have little four legs here. This is a tadpole of a frog. They do not have legs at this stage. In my lab, we make something called a frog, a lottl. So it's a hybrid, it's a combination. It has some cells from the axolotl, some cells from the frog, and we make a chimeric embryo. Now, I ask you a simple question. Will froglottles have legs or not? We have the genomes. You have the axolotl genome, you have the frog genome. Could you tell me if the frog, a lottl, is going to have legs? If it is going to have legs, will Those legs be made entirely of axolotl cells or will they be made of some frog cells? We currently have no ability to predict this from the genomes. We know the entire sequence. No one can tell you if froglottles are going to have legs. And that's because while molecular medicine is very good at this low level kind of description, which proteins interact with which other proteins and so on, we are really a long way away from large scale form and function. What we want in biomedicine is when somebody comes to you and they're missing an arm, or they had a birth defect or a tumor or something else, and they want you to grow them a new one, or perhaps even change the one they have into a different shape. We are still at the very beginning of knowledge with this. And I think that's because we are in biology today, where computer science was in the 1940s and 1950s. This is what programming used to look like. What she's doing here is she's reprogramming this thing by physically moving the wires in and out, she's rewiring the hardware. And the reason that on your laptop, when you want to switch from PowerPoint to Microsoft Word, you don't get out your soldering iron and begin to rewire your laptop, is because computer science has learned something very important, that if your hardware is good enough, and I'm going to say that the biological hardware is absolutely good enough, then instead of trying to force everything bottom up at the level of the hardware, you can take advantage of reprogrammability and other competencies of the machine. And I think that we've only just begun to understand the high level information processing that exists in the amazing agential material of which we are all made. And this is what we need to focus on. Reprogrammability and problem solving capacity of our substrate. Now, when I say intelligence and problem solving, I mean this. William James gave this definition of intelligence. It's the ability to reach the same goal by different means. So I'm not talking about human level intelligence. I'm not talking about what it feels like to solve problems or consciousness or anything like that. I'm talking about a very objective third person kind of competency to navigate some kind of problem space and reach your goal when new things are happening. And this requires, of course, fundamentally this is problem solving and it requires a lot of plasticity. It means that you can't just do the same thing every time. You can't rely on your genome to instruct you on exactly what to do you have to have problem solving capacity? So let's talk about this. We as humans and as scientists are reasonably good at detecting intelligence in three dimensional space. So we see birds or primates, maybe a whale or an octopus or something, and we see medium sized objects moving through three dimensional space at medium speeds and we can notice intelligence. But I want to stress that in biology there are many other spaces in which intelligences navigate and make decisions and solve problems and feel stress and so on. There is transcriptional space, so the space of all possible gene expression levels, there is physiological state space. And this one we'll talk more about today, which is anatomical morphospace or the space of possible anatomical configurations. In all of these spaces, they are very hard for us to visualize. We don't consider these kinds of actions as behavior. But if you look carefully and if you use the tools of computational neuroscience and behavior science, you can find phenomena that bridge these two worlds. All of the things that we study in physiology and molecular biology, they are really behavior of unconventional intelligences. I want to show you a couple of examples of problem solving. Here is a planarium, this flatworm, and we discovered this a few years ago, that if you put these planaria in a solution of barium, barium chloride blocks all the potassium channels. The first thing that happens is their heads explode. Literally overnight. Their heads explode because these cells cannot continue functioning without the ability of exchanging potassium with the outside medium. But then if you hold onto these tails, something interesting happen. Over a couple of weeks time, these heads will regenerate, a new head. And the new head in barium, you keep them in barium, the new head will form and the new head is completely barium adapted. So it has no problem being in this barium solution. So we asked the simple question, how is that possible? We looked at the genes expressed in these barium adapted heads compared to the genes in the normal head. And we found that really there's only about a dozen or so transcripts that are, that are different. So now think about what's going on here. This is. I always visualize this as being in a, in a nuclear reactor control room and the thing is melting down. There are all these buttons. What do you do? You, you. This is a completely novel stressor. These planaria have never seen barium before. You have a physiological, a very strong physiological problem and you need to figure out which of your genes you're going to turn on or off to solve this problem. You can't do it randomly because there's no time to look for, to look for, to look through all the astronomical combinations of possible gene expressions through like a thousand, you know, 20,000 dimensional state space or something like that. And of course, if you start randomly changing genes, you're most likely to kill the cells anyway. How do you find in this scenario? What should you do for this novel problem? And we've seen this many, many times, cells have remarkable ability to find solutions to novel problems. And we as workers in medicine should be looking for a translator interface to ask them how they do it. In other words, we should be able to ask the cell, for a given stressor, what kinds of homeostatic adjustments would you do? Because actually they can do many things that we have no idea how to do. But let's move beyond this single cell survival and talk about anatomy and where the body comes from. Now we know that development is incredibly reliable. So these eggs reliably will give rise to a normal target morphology. And also we know that there's a huge rise in complexity from this state state. Anatomically complexity rises. But the reason I'm calling this intelligence is not because it becomes more complex or because it is reliable. That's not sufficient for intelligence. What I'm talking about is problem solving. And specifically the idea that if you take these early mammalian embryos, for example, and you cut them into pieces, you don't get half bodies. What you get are perfectly normal monozygotic twins and triplets. And that's because this process can reach the goal state, the goal state in anatomical space being something like a normal human morphology, from different starting positions. They will in fact avoid local minima and get to where they're going through novel paths. And regulative development does an amazing job at this. Some animals can do this throughout their lifespan. So for example, here's a salamander. This vertebrate can regenerate its eyes, its jaws, its limbs, portions of the heart and the brain, its spinal cord and its ovaries. Just think how amazing it would be for evolution, for regenerative medicine if we understood how this worked. What happens here is that if you deviate here are the cells have reached their target morphology. Here's a perfect limb. If you amputate anywhere along this length, the cells will very quickly start to build and they will build this structure and then they stop when they're finished. That is the most amazing thing about regeneration, is that it stops when it's done, okay? Because if you deviate it from the correct position in anatomical space, it can tell that that's happened and it will Work very hard to get back to its goal. So this is a kind of homeostasis, this is a kind of anatomical homeostasis. Now this regeneration is not just for the so called lower animals. So the human liver, of course, is highly regenerative. Deer regenerate huge amounts of bone and vasculature and innervation. Every year they grow about a centimeter and a half of bone per day. When they're doing this, it's just remarkable. Human children have also, below a age, have also been known to regenerate their fingertips. So we have some regenerative capacity, obviously not as good as a salamander. But the most interesting part of this is the ability to accommodate novel scenarios. This is something that we discovered that if you take this tadpole, which is supposed to become a frog, and in order to become a frog, it has to rearrange its face, the eyes, the jaws, the nostrils, everything must move. So all of this stuff has to rearrange. You might think, and people did think, that this was just a hardwired set of processes. Every organ moves in the right direction, the right amount, and eventually you go from a normal tadpole to a normal frog. So we decided to test that in order to see the intelligence of these materials, you need to challenge them with problems. You need to do perturbations, functional perturbations. What we did was we created the so called Picasso like tadpoles. What's happening here is, look, the eyes on the back of the head, the mouth is off to the side. The whole thing is scrambled, everything is rearranged. And what we found is that they still make remarkably normal frogs because all of these organs move through novel paths. In fact, sometimes they go too far and they must come back. They go through novel paths until they get to where they're going and then they stop. And we could track all of this with CT scan. It turns out that the genetics does not specify a hardwired set of movements. What it gives you is a system that executes an error minimization scheme. It is able to detect that it's in the wrong position, it's able to move in the correct direction, and then it stops when it's done. So again, this idea of homeostasis. But now we have to ask some very basic questions. First of all, how does it know what the correct position is? How does it know what a normal frog face looks like? And number two, how does it do the computations that take it from the abnormal position and get it closer? How does it navigate that anatomical morphous space. Okay, what kind of competencies does it have for navigation and how does it work? Well, we took our inspiration from another system where we know what sorts of mechanisms lead from high level goals in some kind of problem space to the actuation of movement in that space. The most familiar, of course, is the nervous system. The hardware in the nervous system looks like this. You have neurons that have ion channels in their membrane. These ion channels produce a voltage gradient which may or may not be propagated through electrical synapse to their neighbors. And the movement of this electrical information through the network is what underlies the thing that I talked about at the beginning of the, of the talk, which is the ability to pursue goals in a problem space, right? To process information, to remember what your goal is, and then to act in order to get closer to that goal. So it is the commitment of neuroscience that, that electrophysiology is what underlies the software of the mind. This is, this is a real time zebrafish brain. You can see all the signal in the zebrafish brain. And the idea is that if we knew how to decode this, we would be able to read out the memories, the preferences, the goals, the behavioral repertoire of this animal, that all of its cognitive features are encoded in the electrophysiology of these cells. This is our inspiration for asking, how does a group of cells know what the goal is? And how does it try to get there? Well, it turns out that this idea, the. The use of electrophysiological networks to process information, to link and align information across distance and across time, from the past to the future, was discovered by evolution very early. It did not wait for neurons and muscles and brains to evolve. It actually evolved around the time of bacterial biofilms. So every cell in your body has these ion channels. All the cells in your body are electrically active. Not like the nerves, they don't spike necessarily, but they're all electrically active. And many of them have these electrical gap junctions and they form networks. So what do these networks think about? If this network thinks about moving you through three dimensional space, this network thinks about how to maintain, how to build and maintain the complex anatomy of your body. The cellular collective uses bioelectricity to navigate anatomical space. First to build it during embryonic development, and then to defend it against cancer and against aging throughout the lifespan. And so we've started the same kind of project, like neural decoding, but not in neurons, to see if we can interpret these. And so this is all the electrical conversations that an early frog embryo is conducting. So you can See the colors correspond to different voltage levels. And you can see all the cells having these little interactions with each other to determine who's going to be head tail, left, right. Could we learn to decode this? Could we understand what are the, the memories, what are the plans that this morphogenetic collective intelligence has? So we developed the first tools to read and write the electrical information of the non neural tissues. First we use voltage sensitive fluorescent dyes. Here you can see what that looks like. So there are some in this group of cells, there are some, of course, some rapid changes, but there are also some quite slow changes. There's all kinds of pattern. These cells are doing lots of things. We do a lot of computer simulation to tie the electrophysiology to the gene expression, understand its properties. For example, how does it change over time, how does it spread over distance, all that kind of thing. I want to show you two interesting patterns. This is a time lapse of the frog embryo putting its face together. So you can see. And this is a grayscale color map of the voltage. And you can see there's a lot going on. But this is one frame from that video. In this one frame we call this the electric face. And this was first found by Danny Adams in my group. What happens is that long before the genes come on and the cells are starting to build a face, these bioelectric patterns are already regionalizing the tissue. And they are telling the cells where all the organs are going to be. This is where the animal's right eye is going to be. Here's the mouth, here are the placodes. And if you manipulate this electrical data structure, you will see that the gene expression changes and the anatomy changes. And I'll show you that in a bit minute. This is a critical natural component of normal embryogenesis. We are reading now the bioelectrical pre pattern, the memory that these cells are going to use in order to plan and then build the face. Here's a pathological structure and we'll talk about that in a minute. This is human oncogenes have been injected into this tadpole. They're going to make a tumor. The tumor is going to metastasize here, but long before that happened happens. You can use these voltage dyes to read the electric state of these cells and see that there's a region here which is quite aberrant, it's quite abnormal, it's highly depolarized, very different than the rest. And here's where the tumor is going to be. And then here are some Straggler cells that you should watch out for. So we built these tools to read the electrical information. But much more important than that is to be able to modify and to do functional experiments and write the information. And so here's how we do it. We do not use any electrodes. There are no fields, there are no waves, there are no frequen electromagnetics. Basically we do exactly what neuroscience does to control the interface that these cells are using to control each other. That means we can change the open, close state of the gap junctions. So we can open or shut them and control which cells talk to which other cells. And we can directly control these different ion channels. So this means with pharmacology, this means with mutant channels, it means optogenetics. All the tools of neuroscience we can deploy here now. Now here comes the critical question. Okay, so what can you do with this? When you change these voltage patterns, what actually happens? How do we know that the cells care about this at all? Well, one thing that you can do is you can call up new organs this way. And I'll show you one in particular. But you can make ectopic inner ear structures. So here are some otocysts, you can make ectopic hearts here you can make extra forebrain, here's where the normal forebrain stops. So you can make this extra large forebrain, we can call up extra limbs. So here's our six legged FR frog here and so on. And one particular example I want to show you in, in a little bit of detail is the induction of ectopic eyes. So this is the, the developmental biology textbook will tell you that only the cells here in the anterior neurectoderm are capable of forming eyes. And that's because they use this so called master eye gene called PAX6 to try to induce eyes. And it's true, if you use PAX6 it only forms up here. But it turns out that if you use potassium channels, so ion channel MRNA for specific potassium channels and you inject them into regions of the embryo where they will set up that little spot, that little voltage pattern that I showed you in the electric face. If you set up that pattern somewhere else, then what it does is convinces cells to build an eye. So here's an eye made out of cells that were going to be gut here. And if you section that eye, you have lens, retina, optic nerve, all the same, same kinds of things that that should be in an eye. But notice, notice a couple of interesting things. First of all, the bioelectric Pattern is clearly instructive by re. By rearranging that pattern somewhere else, you can call up whole entire organ. So it's clearly functionally determinative of what happens. It's not an epiphenomenon. The second thing is that it is incredibly modular, meaning that we didn't have to tell these cells how to build an eye. We didn't say anything about stem cells, about gene expression, about the geometry of all the different tissues inside the eye. We didn't say any of that. All we provided was a very high level subroutine call that says build an eye here. And this is really great for regenerative medicine because that means we can call up complex downstream outcomes without having to or knowing how to micromanage the details. And then finally, just to point out another interesting competency of the material, look, this is a cross section through an eye in the flank of an embryosome somewhere. The blue cells are the ones that we actually targeted with our ion channel rna. But what they did was they realized there's not enough of them to make a good eye. So they recruited all these other natural cells to work with them to make this eye. Much like ants and termites, a different kind of collective intelligence recruits their friends from the, from the colony to help them move heavy objects. We didn't have to teach the cells to do that. They already do it. As soon as these cells learn that they must make it out, they take on the next step of instructing all these other cells that you have to help. And here's how we make an eye. All of these are things that we have to take advantage of. And this is not available from the bottom up level of genes or proteins or anything like that. We have to understand the decision making and the collective competencies of our material. I want to show you another story about limb regeneration. Normally in frogs, if you amputate the limb, unlike salamanders, frogs do not regenerate their legs at this adult stage. What you actually is something quite interesting. We call it injury. Mirroring the cut leg will, will show you a bioelectric signal here at the wound, but so will the uncut leg. Within 30 seconds, the information passes to the leg that was never touched. And that leg lights up at exactly the same location where the wound happened on the opposite side. It is not neurally mediated. You can remove the spinal cord, it still works fine. That information is spread across and we know bioelectrical networks are really good at spreading information. So now those of you interested medicine now can start to think what Kind of information about disease and injury is available at a distance on the opposite side of the body that we could read and have some kind of surrogate site diagnostics where you don't have to actually measure the tissue. You're talking about what other tissues are picking up damage information like that. But going beyond that, we decided to test if we could tell these cells to go to the regeneration area, not in the amorphous space, not the scarring area. We developed a cocktail of ionophore that basically triggers regeneration and immediately you start to get toes, you get a toenail, eventually you get a quite nice leg that keeps growing. The leg is touch sensitive, it is motile, you know, well patterned, fairly respectable. Again, the thing is that we don't say how to build a leg, we don't know how to build a leg. All we tell the cells is we communicate the goal, we say build a leg and then we don't touch it. A one day intervention with our cocktail tail results in a year and a half of leg growth, during which time we don't touch it at all. Once you've communicated to the cells, they do the rest. And at this point I have to do a disclosure because there's a company here called Morphaceuticals, which was started by David Kaplan and myself. And we are now moving that technology through the use of wearable bioreactors into mammals and eventually we hope into human patients to be able to use these stimuli, these triggers of complex organ regeneration. And we're aiming with morphaceuticals, we're aiming for limb regeneration, hopefully eventually in patients. The next story I want to tell you about is birth defects. Once again, these bioelectrical patterns are critical for the organs to know what shape they should be. Here's the brain of a tadpole. So here's the forebrain, the midbrain, the hindbrain. If these embryos are exposed to a teratogen, for example, nicotine or alcohol, or many other things, you can see there's a defect. The forebrain is greatly damaged. The eyes are connected to the brain. There's not the right shape. Everything is problematic here. We decided to ask, what can we do about this? Could we fix this somehow? We made a computational model that linked the changes in the bioelectrics with the final outcome. That model was good enough that we could ask it a simple question. If the brain is incorrectly shaped, what ion channel could we open or close in order to repair that? So here's again a normal brain. This is a Brain of an embryo with a mutation in a gene called Notch. Notch is a very important neurogenesis gene. With this dominant Notch mutation, look, the forebrain is basically gone. The midbrain and hindbrain are just bubbles. These animals have no behavior. They're profoundly affected. This is a radical birth defect. Now, what we did was we asked this model how could we fix this. The model pointed us to one specific ion channel called HCM. And it suggested that if we turn on HCN2, the sharpness of the pattern that is ruined here, and I'm skipping a lot of information for a lack of time that I could show you what these patterns look like, that basically what's happening here is that the pattern has become blurry or fuzzy. It's just not sharp enough. And the edges, the brain doesn't know where the edges are. And so we used the opening of HCN2 to sharpen that pattern. And when we do that, and you could do that with drugs that open in native HCN2, or you can introduce novel HCN2 RNA. In either case, case, you're back to a normal shaped brain, normal gene expression in the brain, and in fact their IQs come back to normal. We tested their learning rates and they're indistinguishable from controls now. So, so these animals here, they have a, a genetic Notch mutation, a dominant notch mutation. But you couldn't tell that from their behavior or from the anatomy or from the gene expression. They're all fixed. And so at least in some cases, and I'm not saying this will be true in all cases, but at least in some cases, certain hardware defects can be fixed in software by communicating the correct pattern to the cells, regardless of what's underneath and what would have happened normally with the hardware. So this is our roadmap for birth defect repair. And so what we're doing now is creating this, the system, we call it eden, the electroceutical design environment, where you know what the electric state is that's incorrect, that you're trying to fix. If we do enough physiomics to get the data so that you know what the correct, correct pattern is, then you can ask the computational system which ion channel targets are the ones that are going to get you from the wrong state to the correct state. And so you can already play with this. This is online at this, at this link. Anybody can look at different tissues, both normal and transformed, and it will tell you which are the ion channels that are your potential targets. And that makes it easy for you to pick Electroceuticals. Now we can pick drugs. Something like 20% of all, all drugs are ion channel drugs. And so there's this enormous toolkit that allows us to do these kinds of things. Once the computational model tells you what to do, the final thing I want to show you has to do with cancer. Our cells are extremely good at solving little tiny problems. They have very small goals. Their goals are around metabolic state, about the ph level. These little tiny goals really at the level of a single single cell. But look at, look at this homeostatic system. This, this huge collective has enormous grandiose goals of building a limb. And when they're deviated from that, they work really hard to get back there. So evolution and development has allowed the scaling of the goals to, to rise during, during the lifetime. And of course there's a failure mode, unfortunately, to this process, and that's cancer. So this is human glioblastoma. What's happening here is that these cells are disconnecting from the electrical network. Network. When they disconnect, they can no longer remember this giant thing they're working on. They're back to their ancient unicellular, tiny little cognitive light cone. And then these cells, these cells are not more selfish than normal cells. They just have smaller selves. The idea is that cancer is a kind of a dissociative identity disorder of the cellular collective intelligence. These cells are only working on little tiny single cell goals now. And so this means two things. It means first of all that we can watch for this electrical change and we can envision. So this has not been created yet. This is kind of an artist's rendition of what we're working on. But the idea is to have a kind of augmented reality goggles along with a voltage sensitive dye so that surgeons or even people at home actually with these dyes can look and see pre cancer. They can see cells that are about to disconnect from the network, and they can see the margins of the tumor. And this is where the aberrant electrical states are. We're hoping to create something like that. But even more importantly than just detecting it, you can imagine what if we forcibly reconnected these cells to their neighbors, not kill them with toxic chemotherapy, but just reconnect them. And so here is an animal injected with a nasty oncogene. We've done Kras mutations, dominant, negative P53, all those kinds of things. What you'll see is that the oncoprotein is still blazingly expressed here. It's very strong, but there is no tumor, because this is the same animal here, because we co injected an ion channel that forces. It doesn't kill the cells, it doesn't remove the oncoprotein, but what it does do is force the cells into an electrical network that will work towards large scale goals, building nice skin, nice muscle, and so on. And we think this is also this normalization, this tumor reprogramming or normalization approach, not at the genetic level. Here's another example where the physiological state drives the outcome, not the genetic state, but the physiological information drives the outcome. We've now started moving from the frog model into the human model. This is some recent work, Juanita Matthews recent work in human glioblastoma and looking for ion channel drug combinations that actually normalize these cells and make them stop proliferating and be more neural. Like. The very last thing I want to show you is this. Take a look at this little creature. If I asked you what this was, you might guess that, that it's some kind of simple life form that we found on the bottom of a lake somewhere. And also, if you thought about its competencies, you might think that the conventional kinds of things that simple aquatic animals make. But it's really important to understand for definitive regenerative medicine, it's important to understand our material. And what I will tell you is that if you were to sequence this genetically sequence, what you would see is 100% Homo sapiens. These are adult human cells. In fact, we call them anthrobots because these are biobots made from adult patient donated tracheal epithelium. These cells in a special environment self assemble into this motile little thing that you just saw. This is what they look like when we stain them. They have little hairs on their surface that they use. Here are these little cilia that they use to swim around. And they have some really interesting competencies. I can only show you one today. Here's one. One. These are human neurons plated in a dish here and here. We've made a scratch wound. It's a defect, it's a scratch. And they navigate these wounds, they traverse them. Then what happens is they can settle there and they form these superbot clusters. This is probably around 10 of these anthrobots. They form this cluster. But what they're doing here, if you look carefully, is they're knitting together the two sides of the neural wound. In other words, when you lift them up four days later, you find that underneath this is what they were doing, they were healing. The gap here between this injury, these Are IPS neurons like peripheral innervation. Who would have thought that your tracheal cells, which sit quietly for decades in your airway, have the ability to form a multi little creature that looks nothing like a standard human or any human developmental sequence. They express thousands of genes differently than the native human tissue, almost like a different life form. And yet they have this amazing capacity to heal your body. And so this is the beginning of what we call agential interventions. You know, drugs are very simple, they're mechanical, they just do what they do. But is it, wouldn't it be amazing to deploy biobots made of your own cells so you don't need immunosuppression? They're made of the patient's own cells, they go into your body, they do healing properties like this natively, or maybe we've taught them to do other things and then eventually they biodegrade. But they are your own cells and they already know what health, disease, stress, inflammation, cancer, these are all things that cells already understand. We don't need to manufacture this from scratch, such as mechanical nanobots and things like that. I'll stop here and just summarize on what I've tried to say is that I think the rate limiting step in truly transformative regenerative medicine is our ability to communicate goals to cellular swarms, to view them not as complex, complex, complex machines, but actually agents, problem solving agents with goals and preferences and, and agendas that we need to communicate and collaborate with. Genetics and big data are not sufficient for this CRISPR and things like that. You know, the biggest problem is going to be what genes do you crispr, you know, what genes do you edit? It's, it's this kind of bottom up approach for complex problems is not going to be sufficient efficient. Fortunately we have a roadmap for this and it comes from behavior science and neuroscience. And we can exploit the native computation competencies of the software of life. Top down control, resetting their goals, resetting their set points, not trying to micromanage them molecularly. And specifically the bioelectric interface. I mean there's a lot of different kinds of intelligence in cell groups, but bioelectricity is a very nice interface to that intelligence, much like it is in the nervous system. And we now have the beginning of tools, both computational tools and practical benchtop tools to begin to use that interface to make applications and birth defects, regeneration, cancer and synthetic engineering. And so the way I see biomedicine developing in the future is that you have all these bottom up interventions. And this is where all the attention has been focused and there's some incredible advances here, but actually there is now this whole new frontier of top down interventions. I haven't even talked about our work in training cells and tissue so behavior shaping them. Here's the agential implants that I talked about, the electroceuticals, all of this and all of this is discussed in great detail here in these papers. But the idea is that that bioelectrical system that pervades our bodies is an interface to the intelligence that exists at different levels. And now, especially with AI tool tools, we have the ability to not only communicate as we do now with drugs and surgery and so on at the very lowest level, but we can now communicate with some of these higher levels and take advantage of the idea of complex goal driven outcomes propagated down through the intelligence of the tissue, not simply micromanaged. And. Okay, I'll end here. And I just want to thank the people who did all the work. So these are the postdocs and the graduate students who did all the work that I showed you today. We have lots of amazing collaborators and here are the funders that have supported some of this work. And again for disclosures, three companies that have supported this work. So thank you very much for listening.